Title: A Splendid Exchange - How Trade Shaped the World
Author: William J. Bernstein
Published: 2008

-----
  The middlemen cut out by the act, local smugglers and tea merchants,
were not as happy with the new legislation. When news of its passage
arrived in Boston in September 1773, these two groups took action
against the “unfair foreign competition” from the EIC. Ignoring the
inconvenient fact that the act would save their countrymen a substantial
amount of money, merchants and smugglers couched their arguments in the
familiar protectionist language of national interest. (pg. 242 -- On the
Boston Tea Party)
-----
  Mercantilist theory was simplicity itself: a nation’s wealth was
measured by the amount of gold and silver it possessed.
  In other words, international commerce constituted a zero-sum game in
which one nation’s gain came only at the expense of another, and the
only way for a country to grow rich was to garner gold and silver from
abroad by exporting more than it imported. In modern parlance, the route
to wealth lay in a positive trade balance. (pg. 257)

  Martyn saw clearly that mercantilists, by equating gold with wealth,
repeated the mistake of King Midas. Precious metals are useful only
because they can be exchanged for things we want or need. A nation’s
true wealth, Martyn realized, was defined by how much it consumed: (pg.
258)
-----
  The popular image of an entire Chinese population and its economy
ravaged by opium is a misconception. In the first place, the drug was
quite expensive and largely the province of the mandarin and merchant
elite classes. Second, like alcohol, it was catastrophically addictive
in only a small proportion of its users. (...) One modern scholar
estimates that although as many as half of men and one-fourth of women
were occasional users, in 1879 only about one Chinese person in a
hundred inhaled enough opium to even be at risk of addiction.
  The emperor and the mandarins did express some moral outrage over the
debilitation caused by opium, but they were far more concerned about the
drug’s damage to their balance of trade. China subscribed to
European-style mercantilism as faithfully as any seventeenth-century
Western monarchy. Before 1800, the tea trade was, at least in the terms
of the mercantilist ideology of the day, grossly favorable to the
Chinese. The EIC’s records pinpoint 1806 as the year when the silver
flow reversed. (pg. 289-290)
-----
Gutzlaff, an intensely anglophilic Pomeranian Lutheran who spoke most of
the major Chinese dialects, successively marrie three Englishwomen and
believed strongly in the ability of commerce to bring salvation to the
pagan Chinese. Unfortunately for his historical reputation, he chose
opium as his preferred vehicle of Christian redemption. (pg. 292)
-----
The Corn Law of 1804 served to reveal the mind-set and political power
of England's growers, and also clearly illustrated the double-edged
sword of protectionism, which seeks to shelter domestic producers (in
this case, Britain's landed aristocracy) at the expense of consumers.
Essentially, England's landowners sought to make permanent the high
wartime grain prices. (pg. 303)
-----
The Stolper-Samuelson theorem predicts that the main beneficiaries of
increase trade would be the owners of abundant factors in each nation:
capitalists and laborers in England, and landowners (that is, farmers)
in the United States. This is precisely what happened, and thus it was
no coincidence that all these groups favored free trade. Likewise it is
no surprise that the owners of scarce factors in each nation -English
landowners and American laborers and capitalists- sought protection.
(pg. 343)
-----
The political and moral benefits of trade had in fact been eloquently
described by John Stuart Mill nearly a century before:

  The economical advantages of commerce are surpassed in importance by
  those of its effects which are intellectual and moral. It is hardly
  possible to overrate the value, in the present low state of human
  improvement, of placing human beings in contact with persons
  dissimilar to themselves, and with modes of thought and action unlike
  those with which they are familiar.... Commerce first taught nations
  to see with goodwill the wealth and prosperity of one another. Before,
  the patriot, unless sufficiently advanced to feel the world his
  country, wished all countries weak, poor, and ill-governed but his
  own: he now sees in their wealth and progress a direct source of
  wealth and progress a direct source of wealth and progress to his own
  country. (pg. 355)
-----
Free trade provides modest benefits for most of the population while
greatly harming small groups in specific industries and occupations.
Imagine, for example, that the United States forbade the importation of
foreign-grown rice. This would greatly enrich a few thousand domestic
growers, as they would make millions, and most Americans would not
notice the few extra dollars per year hidden in their grocery bills.
(pg. 358)
-----
A century and a half ago, the French Economist Frédéric Bastiat
reportedly said, “When goods are not allowed to cross borders, soldiers
will.” (pg. 376)
-----
