The Machinery of Freedom: Guide to a Radical Capitalism
David D. Friedman

The purpose of this book is to persuade you that a libertarian society would be both free and attractive, that the institutions of private property are the machinery of freedom, making it possible, in a complicated and interdependent world, for each person to pursue his life as he sees fit.
LOCATION: 323

The concept of property is fundamental to our society, probably to any workable society. Operationally, it is understood by every child above the age of three. Intellectually, it is understood by almost no one.
LOCATION: 348

The desire of several people to use the same resources for different ends is the essential problem that makes property institutions necessary.
LOCATION: 374

The direct use of physical force is so poor a solution to the problem of limited resources that it is commonly employed only by small children and great nations.
LOCATION: 377
NOTE: Just started the book but already loving it.

Under institutions of public property, property is held (the use of things is controlled) by political institutions and that property is used to achieve the ends of those political institutions. Since the function of politics is to reduce the diversity of individual ends to a set of common ends (the ends of the majority, the dictator, the party in power, or whatever person or group is in effective control of the political institutions), public property imposes those common ends on the individual.
LOCATION: 392

In a private-property society, if I work hard the main effect is that I am richer. If I choose to work only ten hours a week and to live on a correspondingly low income, I am the one who pays the cost. Under institutions of public property, I, by refusing to produce as much as I might, decrease the total wealth available to the society. Another member of that society can claim, correctly, that my laziness sabotages society's goals, that I am taking food from the mouths of hungry children.
LOCATION: 490

One common objection to private property is that it is an immoral system because it relies on selfishness. This is wrong. Most people define selfishness as an attitude of caring only for oneself and considering other people's welfare of no importance. The argument for private property does not depend on people having such an attitude; it depends only on different people having different ends and pursuing them. Each person is selfish only in the sense of accepting and following his own perception of reality, his own vision of the good.
LOCATION: 573

The alternative offered by those who deplore selfishness is always government. It is selfish to do something for money, so the slums should be cleaned up by a youth corps staffed via ‘universal service’. Translated, that means the job should be done by people who will be put in jail if they do not do it.
LOCATION: 604

If almost everyone is in favor of feeding the hungry, the politician may find it in his interest to do so. But, under those circumstances, the politician is unnecessary: some kind soul will give the hungry man a meal anyway. If the great majority is against the hungry man, some kind soul among the minority still may feed him—the politician will not.
LOCATION: 612

People who dream about a socialist society rarely consider the possibility that some of those other people may succeed in imposing their ends on the dreamer, instead of the other way around. George Orwell is the only exception who comes to mind.
LOCATION: 630

“The poor, whom you wish to help, are many times outnumbered by the rest of the population, from whom you intend to take the money to help them. If the non-poor are not generous enough to give money to the poor voluntarily through private charity, what makes you think they will be such fools as to vote to force themselves to give it?”
LOCATION: 677

This is an illusion. There are some government programs that give money to the poor—Aid to Families With Dependent Children, for instance. But such programs are vastly outweighed by those having the opposite effect—programs that injure the poor for the benefit of the not-poor. Almost surely, the poor would be better off if both the benefits that they now receive and the taxes, direct and indirect, that they now pay were abolished.
LOCATION: 682

One cannot simply say, “Let government help the poor.” “Reform the income tax so that rich people really pay.” Things are as they are for reasons. It would make as much sense for the defender of the free market to argue that when he sets up his free market it will produce equal wages for everyone.
LOCATION: 731

The assertion that the capitalist gets his increased income at the expense of the workers ignores the fact that capital is itself productive, a subject I discuss at greater length in chapter 8. The increased productivity resulting from capital accumulation is one of the reasons for general economic progress.
LOCATION: 778

Under the economic conditions of the nineteenth century, no institutions, socialist, capitalist, or anarcho-capitalist, could have instantly produced what we would regard as a decent standard of living. The wealth simply was not there. If a socialist had confiscated the income of all the capitalist millionaires and given it to the workers, he would have found the workers little better off than before. The millionaires made far more than the workers, but there were so many more workers than millionaires. It required a long period of progress to produce a society rich enough to regard the conditions of the nineteenth century as miserable poverty.
LOCATION: 799

The modern liberal will claim that it was state legislation, limiting hours, preventing child labor, imposing safety regulations, and otherwise violating the principle of laissez faire, that brought progress. But the evidence indicates that the legislation consistently followed progress rather than preceding it. It was only when most workers were already down to a ten-hour day that it became politically possible to legislate one.
LOCATION: 822

His conclusion is that the degree of concentration in the economy has been relatively stable. It always appears to be increasing, because highly concentrated industries are much more visible than more competitive ones.
LOCATION: 844

For the same reason, we tend to exaggerate the amount of concentration existing at any given time. The areas of the economy which we think of as important tend to be those in which we can identify a single large firm. We rarely consider such industries as the restaurant and bar business, domestic service, or the manufacture of textiles and apparel, each of which is highly competitive and each of which employs more people than iron, steel, and automobile manufacturing combined.
LOCATION: 847

In most economic activities, the efficiency of a firm increases with size up to some optimum size and then decreases. The increasing efficiency reflects the advantages of mass production. These advantages generally occur only up to some definite level of size.
LOCATION: 855

To see why this is wrong, suppose the monopoly starts with 99 percent of the market and that the remaining 1 percent is held by a single competitor. To make things more dramatic, let me play the role of the competitor. It is argued that the monopoly, being bigger and more powerful, can easily drive me out. In order to do so, the monopoly must cut its price to a level at which I am losing money. But since the monopoly is no more efficient than I am, it is losing just as much money per unit sold. Its resources may be 99 times as great as mine, but it is also losing money ninety-nine times as fast as I am.
LOCATION: 890

The ICC has served the railroads as a cartelizing agent up to the present day; in addition, it has expanded its authority to cover other forms of transportation and to prevent them, where possible, from undercutting the railroads.
LOCATION: 1032

If you do not believe that the ICC and the CAB are on the side of the industries they regulate, figure out why they set minimum as well as maximum fares.
LOCATION: 1057

The ICC and the CAB exemplify one sort of government-granted monopoly. Another, of comparable importance, is occupational licensing. The political logic is the same. A law is passed, political institutions are established, ostensibly to protect the consumers of some product or service. The producers, having a much more whole-hearted interest than the consumers in the operation of those institutions, take them over. They use them to raise prices and prevent competition.
LOCATION: 1059

How does the AMA control the number of doctors? Refusing to license doctors after they are trained would create a great deal of hostility among those rejected; that would be politically expensive. Instead, it relies mainly on the medical schools. In order to be licensed, an applicant must be a graduate of an approved medical school; the states get their list of approved schools from the Council on Medical Education and Hospitals of the AMA. For a medical school, removal from the list means ruin.
LOCATION: 1083

Many people, faced with the evidence on regulatory commissions and occupational licensure, argue that the solution is to retain the commissions and the licensing but to make them work in the public interest. This is tantamount to arguing that the consistent pattern of almost every regulatory agency and licensing body over the past century is merely accidental and could easily be altered. That is nonsense. Politics does not run on altruism or pious intentions. Politics runs on power.
LOCATION: 1090

A politician who can regulate an industry gets much more by helping the industry, whose members know and care about the effects of the regulation, than by helping the mass of consumers, who do not know they are being hurt and who would not know if they were being protected. An astute politician can—as many have—both help the industry and get credit for protecting the consumers. The consumers, whose relationship to the industry is a very small part of their lives, will never know what prices they would have been paying if there were no regulation.
LOCATION: 1094

Monopoly power exists only when a firm can control the prices charged by existing competitors and prevent the entry of new ones. The most effective way of doing so is by the use of government power. There are considerable elements of monopoly in our economy, but virtually all are produced by government and could not exist under institutions of complete private property.
LOCATION: 1120

The trouble with this argument is that it does not recognize that paying for tools today and waiting for years to get the money back is itself a productive activity and that the interest earned by capital is the corresponding payment.
LOCATION: 1138

If they had been willing and able to work on those terms, the capitalist would indeed have been superfluous; the workers could have built the factory themselves, working for free, received their pay over the next ten years and continued to receive it for forty years more. It is the function of the capitalist to pay them wages in advance. If he were not available to pay them, the factory would not be built and the goods would not be produced. He himself bears a cost, since he too would rather have the money to do with as he wishes in 1850 instead of having it tied up and released slowly over a period of time. It is perfectly reasonable that he should receive something for his contribution.
LOCATION: 1149

The advantage of money today over money tomorrow is tiny, as is the interest accumulated by ten dollars in one day. When the time involved is a substantial portion of a man's life, the difference in value is also substantial. It is not a matter of indifference to me whether I can buy a house for my family today or ten years from now. Nor is the ten years insignificant to the man who lends me the money now and expects to receive something in exchange. The Marxist is wrong to regard interest received by a capitalist or paid by a debtor to a creditor as stolen money. It is actually payment for value received.
LOCATION: 1161

It is his father who pays for it. If the son were literally living on food produced and stored by his father this would be obvious, and few would object. But the situation is really the same when the father chooses to invest wealth instead of consuming it or turning it into stores of food. By buying a factory instead of a yacht, he is increasing the productivity of the society. Workers are able to produce more, using that factory, than they could without it. It is that additional production which feeds his son.
LOCATION: 1170

The error is in the idea that improved health is worth having at any price, however large, for any improvement in health, however small. There is some point at which the cost in time and money of more medical care is greater than the resulting increase in health justifies. Where that point occurs depends on the subjective value to the person concerned of good health, on the one hand, and the other things he could buy with the money or do with the time, on the other. If medical care is sold on the market, like other goods and services, individuals will consume it up to that point and spend the rest of their money on other things.
LOCATION: 1216

If past experience is any guide, the poor are not likely to get much that they do not pay for and may pay for things they do not get. The principal effect of such programs, on them as on everyone else, is to force them to pay for services that they would not buy willingly because they do not think them worth the price. This is called helping the poor.
LOCATION: 1230

Defenders of such programs argue that the poor are so poor that they cannot afford vital medical care. What this means, presumably, is that they are so poor that in order to pay for even minimal medical care they would have to give up something even more vital—food, for instance. But since the benefits the poor receive are usually paid for by their own taxes, the situation is only made worse; instead of having to give up medical care in order to eat, the poor are commanded to give up eating in order to get medical care.
LOCATION: 1233

If people who have more money wish to donate it to providing medical care to the poor, that is admirable. If they wish to donate the money of the poor, it is not.
LOCATION: 1241

The public school is a monopoly by virtue of the money it receives from state and local governments. In order to compete with it, an unsubsidized private school must be, not merely better, but so much better that its customers are willing to forgo their share of that money.
LOCATION: 1275

The best solution to this problem would be for any state instituting a voucher system to include, as part of the initial legislation, the provision that any institution can qualify as a school on the basis of the performance of its graduates on objective examinations.
LOCATION: 1295

Under the voucher plan a ghetto parent who was deeply concerned about his child's education might be able to scrape up a thousand dollars a year or get a small scholarship, add that to the value of his voucher, and so send the child to a good private school. Under the present system he has the choice of either paying $5,000 a year for a good private school or buying a $200,000 house in a suburb with a good school system.
LOCATION: 1341

Departments in a university that reaches corporate decisions in important matters will tend to become groups of true believers, closed to all who do not share the proper orthodoxy. They so forfeit one of the principal tools in the pursuit of truth—intellectual conflict.
LOCATION: 1420

Democratic decision making is a means for finding and implementing the will of the majority; it has no other function. It serves not to encourage diversity but to prevent it.
LOCATION: 1449

Unrestricted immigration would make us richer, as it has in the past. Our wealth is in people, not things; America is not Kuwait. If a working wife can hire an Indian maid who earned a few thousand dollars a year in India to work for her at twelve thousand dollars a year, and so spend her own time on an eighty thousand a year job, who is worse off?
LOCATION: 1533

As long as the immigrants pay for what they use, they do not make the rest of the society poorer. If increased population makes the country more crowded, it does so only because the immigrants produce wealth which is worth more to the owners of land than the land is worth and the immigrants are able to use that wealth to buy the land. The same applies to whatever the immigrants get on the free market; in order to appropriate existing resources for their own uses, the immigrants must buy them with new goods of at least equal value.
LOCATION: 1536

The new immigrants will drive down the wages of unskilled labor, hurting some of the present poor. At the same time, the presence of millions of foreigners will make the most elementary acculturation, even the ability to speak English, a marketable skill; some of the poor will be able to leave their present unskilled jobs to find employment as foremen of work gangs of recent immigrants or front men for immigrant enterprises.
LOCATION: 1542

It is a shame that the argument must be put in terms of the economic or psychological interest of the present generation of Americans. It is simpler than that. There are people, probably many millions, who would like to come here, live here, work here, raise their children here, die here. There are people who would like to become Americans, as our parents and grandparents did.
LOCATION: 1553

The rush hour problem is a good example. The size of city expressways is determined almost entirely by the peak traffic that they have to bear. The extra cost to the city of an additional driver at 3 a.m. is essentially zero—the roads are there anyway and nobody is using them. The extra cost of an extra driver at rush hour averages out, I am told, to about five dollars per trip. Presently, both drivers are charged the same price, in the form of higher gas costs due to gas taxes. If the roads were privately run, it would pay their owners to encourage off-hour traffic by charging a low price and to discourage people from driving at rush hour by charging them the full cost of their trip.
LOCATION: 1572

Wherever there is a government monopoly there is inefficiency, bad service, and an opportunity for profits. Capitalism is striking back.
LOCATION: 1709

Is this an evil, commercialized vision that only a filthy capitalist utterly debased by greed could approve? The alternative was to use the state's taxing power to take an average of $500 from every family in the country, willing or unwilling—at the point of a metaphorical gun. Is that better than selling the commercial values of the program to willing customers? Greedy capitalists get money by trade. Good liberals steal it.
LOCATION: 1778

The American flag, on the moon or anywhere else, is worthless except as a symbol, a symbol of men achieving their ends by voluntary association, cooperating through mutual exchange in a free society. Capitalism. It is in no way honored by spending billions of dollars of tax monies to put a piece of painted metal on the moon.
LOCATION: 1786

Someone who becomes addicted by associating with other addicts has not been forcibly infected. He has seen a behavior pattern and chosen to adopt it. He may do so, as Mr. Buckley says, because he is “psychologically weak or misinformed.” Such possibilities exist for any decision—getting married, joining the Catholic church or subscribing to National Review.
LOCATION: 1815

Mr. Buckley might not concede that addiction damages mostly the addict; he quotes Mayor Wagner as estimating “the cost to the community in crime, treatment, and added police protection” at a billion dollars a year. If true, this comes to about $20,000 per addict; the city could save money by hiring a policeman to accompany every addict at all times. Whether true or not, it is irrelevant. This is the cost not of addiction but of laws prohibiting narcotics. Addicts commit virtually no crimes while actually high on narcotics; they have neither the will nor, usually, the ability. They steal to pay for the next fix. If legal, narcotics would cost a small fraction of their present price and few addicts would have to engage in large-scale crime to pay the costs, just as few alcoholics do.
LOCATION: 1828

Regulation is naturally biased in favor of the ins against the outs, the orthodox against the radical—in this case, the doctors and the AMA against the nutritionists. The orthodox side is able to give its position the force of law, to forbid manufacturers from stating arguments that the government and the AMA do not accept or to forbid individual consumers from buying a product that in their judgment isn't good for them.
LOCATION: 1886

Visibility is an important element in politics and the FDA is a political institution. Given a choice between one tragedy on the front page and ten in the medical statistics, it inevitably prefers the latter. It thus has a strong bias in favor of overregulating, of stifling medical progress in the name of caution.
LOCATION: 1902

Teenagers present a more serious problem. Many run away and stay away for considerable periods. The decision to run away is doubtless a mistake in many cases. But do our present laws, which in theory make it possible for the parents to have the police haul the runaway home, achieve any useful purpose? Short of physical incarceration, there is no way to keep a child from running away again. The main effect of these laws, I believe, is to force runaways into hiding and thus to force them to associate with people who are themselves hostile to the laws and values of the society.
LOCATION: 1941

It must be terrible to be brought up in a moral vacuum. It is no wonder that the girl preferred to live with someone who showed, by her very willingness to criticize, that she believed in some values that made criticism possible. It is this sort of authority that our generation needs. For those who lack it, the policeman's club is no substitute.
LOCATION: 1951

As long as individuals are free to own property, produce, buy, and sell as they wish, the fact that most people choose to organize themselves into workers' cooperatives is no more a limitation on the society's freedom than is the fact that people in this country presently organize themselves into firms. It would, doubtless, be inconvenient for those who wanted things arranged differently—aspiring capitalists, for instance, who could find no work force because all the workers preferred to work for themselves. In exactly the same way, our present society is inconvenient for a socialist who wants to set up a factory as a workers' cooperative but cannot find anyone to provide the factory. The right to trade only applies to a situation where the exchange is voluntary—on both sides.
LOCATION: 2011

in such a saturation of demand argue that above some income (usually about twice their own) consumption ceases to be useful and becomes pure show, so that when production reaches this level, there need be no more scarce goods. This argument confuses amount of consumption with the physical quantity consumed. There is a limit to the amount of food I can eat or the number of cars I can conveniently use. There is no obvious limit to the resources that can be usefully employed in producing a better car or better food. For $20,000 a car can be made better than for $10,000; for $40,000, better than for $20,000. If the median income rises to $100,000 a year, we shall have no difficulty spending it.
LOCATION: 2056

argument also confuses the technical economic meaning of ‘scarce resources’ with the conventional meaning of ‘scarce’. Even if no one is hungry, food is still scarce, since some cost must be incurred in order for me to have more or better food. Either someone has to give up food or someone must pay the cost of producing more. The opposite of a scarce good is not a plentiful good but a free good, something available in sufficient supply for everyone at no cost.
LOCATION: 2062

problem of plenty is not a new one for capitalism. It has dealt with that problem by providing more and better ways to use larger and larger incomes—so successfully that Abbie Hoffman hardly realizes how rich we already are by the standards of previous centuries. Capitalism will continue to deal with the problem of plenty in the same way. It's only fair: capitalism created the problem.
LOCATION: 2073

The pollution problem exists because certain things, such as the air or the ocean, are not property. Anyone who wishes to use them as garbage dumps is free to do so. If the pollution were done to something that belonged to someone, the owner would permit it only if the polluter were willing to pay him more than the damage done. If the polluters themselves owned the property they were polluting, it would pay them to stop if the damage they did were greater than the cost of avoiding it; few of us want to dump our garbage on our own front lawns.
LOCATION: 2081

Of course, the government claims that its present decisions are based on how avoidable the pollution is. But every polluter wants to keep polluting, as long as it does not cost him anything. Every polluter will claim that his pollution is unavoidable. Who gets away with it depends not on real costs but on politics. If polluters must pay for their pollution, however avoidable or unavoidable, we will rapidly find out which ones can or cannot stop polluting.
LOCATION: 2107

Now consider the same situation with votes. The man with the larger faction votes to have the flour given to him and his allies for bread. Then he votes to have the remaining flour given to them for making paper mache. He wins both times, ten to five. Since voting is much more of an all-or-nothing thing than spending, such inequalities as do exist have much greater effects. This may explain why in our society, where the poor are also politically weak, they do far worse on things provided by the government, such as schooling and police protection, than on those sold privately, such as food and clothes.
LOCATION: 2134

Externalities play an enormously greater role in institutions controlled by voting. If I invest time and energy in discovering which candidate will make the best President, the benefit of that investment, if any, is spread evenly among 200 million people. That is an externality of 99.9999995 percent. Unless it is obvious how I should vote, it is not worth the time and trouble to be a well informed voter except on issues where I get a disproportionately large fraction of the benefit. Situations, in other words, where I am part of a special interest. Consider the CAB again. In order for me, an occasional airline passenger, to do anything about it, I would have to keep track of how every member of the board voted, by whom he was appointed and how my congressmen voted on every bill connected with airline regulation. Having done so, the chance that my vote or any pressure I might try to bring to bear on my congressmen or the President would alter the situation is one in millions. And if I am successful, all I get is a saving of a hundred dollars or so a year in lower air fares. It isn't worth it. For the airline industry the same research, backed by enormously larger resources in votes and money, brings a return of many millions of dollars. For them it is worth it. It is not that they are richer than all airline passengers combined; they are not. But they are concentrated and we are dispersed.
LOCATION: 2165

Special interest politics is a simple game. A hundred people sit in a circle, each with his pocket full of pennies. A politician walks around the outside of the circle, taking a penny from each person. No one minds; who cares about a penny? When he has gotten all the way around the circle, the politician throws fifty cents down in front of one person, who is overjoyed at the unexpected windfall. The process is repeated, ending with a different person. After a hundred rounds everyone is a hundred cents poorer, fifty cents richer, and happy.
LOCATION: 2176

More efficient means of production do drive out less efficient means, but your definition of efficiency is too narrow. If under one arrangement a worker produces a dollar an hour more than under another but the conditions are so much worse that he will gladly accept a wage of two dollars an hour less to work under the other, which is more efficient? For both the employer, who saves more on wages than he loses on production, and for the worker, the physically less productive arrangement is the more efficient. The efficiency of capitalism takes account of nonmonetary as well as monetary costs and products.
LOCATION: 2184

In the ideal socialist state power will not attract power freaks. People who make decisions will show no slightest bias toward their own interests. There will be no way for a clever man to bend the institutions to serve his own ends. And the rivers will run uphill.
LOCATION: 2191

government, then, useful and necessary? So is a doctor. But suppose the dear fellow claimed the right, every time he was called in to prescribe for a bellyache or a ringing in the ears, to raid the family silver, use the family toothbrushes, and execute the droit de seigneur upon the housemaid? H. L. MENCKEN
LOCATION: 2222

An anarchist is not, except in the propaganda of his enemies, one who desires chaos. Anarchists, like other people, wish to be protected from thieves and murderers. They wish to have some peaceful way of settling disagreements. They wish, perhaps even more than other people, to be able to protect themselves from foreign invasion. What, after all, is the point of abolishing your own government if it is immediately replaced by someone else's? What anarchists do not want is to have these useful services—the services now provided by police, courts, and national defense—provided by the kind of institution that now provides them: government.
LOCATION: 2236

Government is an agency of legitimized coercion. The special characteristic that distinguishes governments from other agencies of coercion, such as ordinary criminal gangs, is that most people treat government coercion as normal and proper. The same act that is regarded as coercive when done by a private individual seems legitimate if done by an agent of the government.
LOCATION: 2247

If I yell “Stop, thief!” at a stickup man escaping with my wallet, the bystanders may or may not help but they will at least recognize the reasonableness of my act. If I yell “Stop, thief!” at an employee of the Internal Revenue Service leaving my house after informing me that he has just frozen my bank account, my neighbors will think I am crazy. Objectively, the IRS is engaged in the same act as the thief. It seizes my resources without my permission. True, it claims to provide me with services in exchange for my taxes, but it insists on collecting the taxes whether or not I want the services. It is, perhaps, a fine point whether that is robbery or extortion. In either case, if it were the act of a private party, everyone would agree that it was a crime.
LOCATION: 2251

Government is an agency of legitimized coercion. If the institutions which replace government perform their functions without coercion, they are not governments. If they occasionally act coercively but, when they do so, their actions are not regarded as legitimate, they are still not governments.
LOCATION: 2267

The arbitrator has no police force. His function is to render decisions, not to enforce them. Currently, arbitrated decisions are usually enforceable in the government courts, but that is a recent development; historically, enforcement came from a firm's desire to maintain its reputation. After refusing to accept an arbitrator's judgment, it is hard to persuade anyone else to sign a contract that specifies arbitration; no one wants to play a game of 'heads you win, tails I lose'.
LOCATION: 2280

The Tannahelp agent calls up his opposite number at Dawn Defense. 'We've got a problem. . . .' After explaining the situation, he points out that if Tannahelp sends six men and Dawn eight, there will be a fight. Someone might even get hurt. Whoever wins, by the time the conflict is over it will be expensive for both sides. They might even have to start paying their employees higher wages to make up for the risk. Then both firms will be forced to raise their rates. If they do, Murbard Ltd., an aggressive new firm which has been trying to get established in the area, will undercut their prices and steal their customers. There must be a better solution. The man from Tannahelp suggests that the better solution is arbitration. They will take the dispute over my television set to a reputable local arbitration firm. If the arbitrator decides that Joe is innocent, Tannahelp agrees to pay Joe and Dawn Defense an indemnity to make up for their time and trouble. If he is found guilty, Dawn Defense will accept the verdict; since the television set is not Joe's, they have no obligation to protect him when the men from Tannahelp come to seize it. What I have described is a very makeshift arrangement. In practice, once anarcho-capitalist institutions were well established, agencies would anticipate such difficulties and arrange contracts in advance, before specific conflicts occurred, specifying the arbitrator who would settle them.
LOCATION: 2315

In such an anarchist society, who would make the laws? On what basis would the private arbitrator decide what acts were criminal and what their punishments should be? The answer is that systems of law would be produced for profit on the open market, just as books and bras are produced today. There could be competition among different brands of law just as there is competition among different brands of cars.
LOCATION: 2327

In such a society there might be many courts and even many legal systems. Each pair of protection agencies agree in advance on which court they will use in case of conflict. Thus the laws under which a particular case is decided are determined implicitly by advance agreement between the agencies whose customers are involved. In principle, there could be a different court and a different set of laws for every pair of agencies. In practice, many agencies would probably find it convenient to patronize the same courts, and many courts might find it convenient to adopt identical, or nearly identical, systems of law in order to simplify matters for their customers.
LOCATION: 2330

Before labeling a society in which different people are under different laws chaotic and unjust, remember that in our society the law under which you are judged depends on the country, state, and even city in which you happen to be. Under the arrangements I am describing, it depends instead on your agency and the agency of the person you accuse of a crime or who accuses you of a crime.
LOCATION: 2335

Consider, as a particular example, the issue of capital punishment. Some people might feel that the risk to themselves of being convicted, correctly or incorrectly, and executed for a capital crime outweighed any possible advantages of capital punishment. They would prefer, where possible, to patronize agencies that patronized courts that did not give capital punishment. Other citizens might feel that they would be safer from potential murderers if it was known that anyone who murdered them would end up in the electric chair. They might consider that safety more important than the risk of ending up in the electric chair themselves or of being responsible for the death of someone falsely accused of murder. They would, if possible, patronize agencies that patronized courts that did give capital punishment.
LOCATION: 2344

Several objections may be raised to such free-market courts. The first is that they would sell justice by deciding in favor of the highest bidder. That would be suicidal; unless they maintained a reputation for honesty, they would have no customers—unlike our present judges.
LOCATION: 2384

The most serious objection to free-market law is that plaintiff and defendant may not be able to agree on a common court. Obviously, a murderer would prefer a lenient judge. If the court were actually chosen by the disputants after the crime occurred, this might be an insuperable difficulty. Under the arrangements I have described, the court is chosen in advance by the agencies. There would hardly be enough murderers at any one time to support their own rights enforcement agency, one with a policy of patronizing courts that did not regard murder as a crime, and if there were, no other agency would accept such courts. The murderers' agency would either accept a reasonable court or fight a hopeless war against the rest of society.
LOCATION: 2393

The main defensive weapon of organized crime is bribery. It works because policemen have no real stake in doing their job well and their ‘customers’ have no standard of comparison to tell them if they are getting their money's worth.
LOCATION: 2410

If the employees of a private protection agency accept such bribes, the situation is rather different. The worse the job the protection agency does, the lower the fee it can charge. If the customers of one agency find they lose, on average, ten dollars a year more to thieves than the customers of another, they will continue to do business with the inferior agency only if it is at least ten dollars a year cheaper. So every dollar stolen from the customer comes, indirectly, out of the revenue of the protection agency. If the agency is one that guarantees performance by insuring its customers against losses, the connection is more direct. Either way, it is very much in the interest of the men running a protection agency to see that their employees do not take bribes. The only bribe it would pay the agency to take would be one for more than the value of the goods stolen—a poor deal for the thief.
LOCATION: 2413

This does not mean that employees of protection agencies will never take bribes. The interests of the employee and of the agency are not identical. It does mean that the men running the agencies will do their best to keep their men honest. That is more than you can say for a police force. Organized crime, if it continues to exist under anarcho-capitalism, should be in a much weaker position than it now is. In addition, as I shall argue later, most of the things that organized crime now makes money on would be legal in an anarcho-capitalist society. Thus both its size and its popularity would be greatly reduced.
LOCATION: 2420

Perhaps the best way to see why anarcho-capitalism would be so much more peaceful than our present system is by analogy. Consider our world as it would be if the cost of moving from one country to another were zero. Everyone lives in a house trailer and speaks the same language. One day the president of France announces that because of troubles with neighboring countries, new military taxes are being levied and conscription will begin shortly. The next morning he finds himself ruling a peaceful but empty landscape, the population having been reduced to himself, three generals, and twenty-seven war correspondents. We do not all live in house trailers. But if we buy our protection from a private firm instead of from a government, we can buy it from a different firm as soon as we think we can get a better deal. We can change protectors without changing countries.
LOCATION: 2438

We must ask, not whether an anarcho-capitalist society would be safe from a power grab by the men with the guns (safety is not an available option), but whether it would be safer than our society is from a comparable seizure of power by the men with the guns. I think the answer is yes. In our society, the men who must engineer such a coup are politicians, military officers, and policemen, men selected precisely for the characteristic of desiring power and being good at using it. They are men who already believe that they have a right to push other men around—that is their job. They are particularly well qualified for the job of seizing power. Under anarcho-capitalism the men in control of the agencies are selected for their ability to run an efficient business and please their customers. It is always possible that some will turn out to be secret power freaks as well, but it is surely less likely than under a system where the corresponding jobs are labeled ‘non-power freaks need not apply’.
LOCATION: 2456

Under a system of private rights enforcement agencies the actual agencies, like the ideal government, are acting as agents for willing clients who have employed them to enforce their own rights. They claim no rights over non-clients other than the right to defend their clients against coercion—the same right every individual has. They do nothing that a private individual cannot do. This does not mean that they will never coerce anyone. A rights enforcement agency, like a government, can make a mistake and arrest the wrong man. In exactly the same way, a private citizen can shoot at what he thinks is a prowler and bag the postman instead. In each case, coercion occurs, but it occurs by accident and the coercer is liable for the consequences of his acts. The citizen can be indicted for postman-slaughter and the agency sued for false arrest. Once the facts that make an act coercive are known, it is no longer regarded as having been legitimate.
LOCATION: 2478

This is not true of government actions. In order to sue a policeman for false arrest I must prove not merely that I was innocent but that the policeman had no reason to suspect me. If I am locked up for twenty years and then proven innocent, I have no legal claim against the government for my lost time and mental anguish. It is recognized that the government made a mistake, but the government is allowed to make mistakes and need not, like the rest of us, pay for them. If, knowing that I am innocent, I try to escape arrest and a policeman shoots me down, he is entirely within his rights and I am the criminal. If, to keep him from shooting me, I shoot him in self-defense, I am guilty of murder even after it is proved that I was innocent of the theft and so doing no more than defending myself against the government's (unintentional) coercion.
LOCATION: 2485

This is not an isolated instance of the miscarriage of justice; it is the inevitable result of a system under which the government has certain special rights above and beyond the rights of ordinary individuals—among them the right not to be held responsible for its mistakes. When these rights are taken away, when the agent of government is reduced to the status of a private citizen and has the same rights and responsibilities as his neighbors, what remains is no longer a government.
LOCATION: 2501

But market demands are in dollars, not votes. The legality of heroin will be determined not by how many are for or against but by how high a cost each side is willing to bear in order to get its way. People who want to control other people's lives are rarely eager to pay for the privilege; they usually expect to be paid for the services they provide for their victims. And those on the receiving end, whether of laws against drugs, laws against pornography, or laws against sex, get a lot more pain out of the oppression than their oppressors get pleasure. They are willing to pay a much higher price to be left alone than anyone is willing to pay to push them around. For that reason the laws of an anarcho-capitalist society should be heavily biased toward freedom.
LOCATION: 2527

If the choice had to be made on an all-or-nothing basis, public opinion against heroin is probably strong enough that people would be willing to bear that cost. But one of the advantages of a market system of laws is its ability to tailor its product to its customers, geographically as well as in other ways. If the maximum return comes from having heroin illegal in some places and legal in others, that is what will happen.
LOCATION: 2541

What I have been saying is that just as the market allocates resources to producing illegal drugs in response to the demands of those who want to use them, it would make use of those drugs legal in response to the same demand. That raises the question of why the same argument does not hold for making murder legal. The answer is that murder hurts someone and it is worth much more to the victim not to be shot than to the murderer to shoot him. There is a market demand from me for a law saying that you cannot kill me. Crimes without victims do not hurt anyone, except in the vague sense of arousing moral indignation in people upset over their neighbors' sins. Thus there is little market demand for laws against them.
LOCATION: 2559

Here as elsewhere, although the market will not bring equality, it will greatly improve the position of the poor. Why? Because the market allows people to concentrate their resources on what is most important to them. I discussed this point earlier in the context of the poor man buying a necessity outbidding the rich man who wants the same good for a luxury. Protection from crime is not a luxury. Current government expenditures on police and courts run about forty dollars a year per capita.[9] According to Friedman's law, that means that private protection of the same average quality would cost about twenty dollars. There are many inhabitants of the ghetto who would be delighted to pay twenty dollars a year if in exchange they actually got protection; many of them have more than that stolen every year as a result of the poor protection they get from our government-run protection system. They would be even happier if at the same time they were relieved of the taxes that pay for the protection that the government police do not give them.
LOCATION: 2574

In spite of popular myths about capitalism oppressing the poor, the poor are worst off in those things provided by government, such as schooling, police protection, and justice. There are more good cars in the ghetto than good schools. Putting protection on the market would mean better protection for the poor, not worse.
LOCATION: 2583

Not only does a consumer have better information than a voter, it is of more use to him. If I investigate alternative brands of cars or protection, decide which is best for me, and buy it, I get it. If I investigate alternative politicians and vote accordingly, I get what the majority votes for. The chance that my vote will be the deciding factor is negligible. Imagine buying cars the way we buy governments. Ten thousand people would get together and agree to vote, each for the car he preferred. Whichever car won, each of the ten thousand would have to buy it. It would not pay any of us to make any serious effort to find out which car was best, since whatever I decide, my car is being picked for me by the other members of the group. Under such institutions, the quality of cars would quickly decline. That is how I must buy products on the political marketplace. I not only cannot compare the alternative products, it would not be worth my while to do so even if I could. This may have something to do with the quality of the goods sold on that market.
LOCATION: 2610

There is a difference between what institutions allow and what they require. If in a capitalist society everyone is convinced of the desirability of one common goal, there is nothing in the structure of capitalist institutions to prevent them from cooperating to attain it. Capitalism allows for a conflict of ends; it does not require it. Socialism does not allow for it. This does not mean that if we set up socialist institutions everyone will instantly have the same ends. The experiment has been tried; they do not. It means rather that a socialist society will work only if people do have the same ends. If they do not it will collapse or, worse, develop, as did the Soviet Union, into a monstrous parody of socialist ideals.
LOCATION: 2633

I have encountered precisely the same error among libertarians who prefer limited government to anarcho-capitalism. Limited government, they say, can guarantee uniform justice based on objective principles. Under anarcho-capitalism, the law varies from place to place and person to person according to the irrational desires and beliefs of the different customers that different protection and arbitration agencies must serve. This argument assumes that the limited government is set up by a population most or all of whose members believe in the same just principles of law. Given such a population, anarcho-capitalism will produce that same uniform, just law; there will be no market for any other. But just as capitalism can accommodate to a diversity of individual ends, so anarcho-capitalism can accommodate to a diversity of individual judgments about justice. An ideal Objectivist society with a limited government is superior to an anarcho-capitalist society in precisely the same sense that an ideal socialist society is superior to a capitalist society. Socialism does better with perfect people than capitalism does with imperfect people; limited government does better with perfect people than anarcho-capitalism with imperfect. And it is better to wear a bikini with the sun shining than a raincoat when it is raining. That is no argument against carrying an umbrella.
LOCATION: 2641

Similarly, if national defense were financed voluntarily, people would give money not as a matter of charity but because they felt that they were receiving something and ought to pay for it. As with tipping, the amount received might have some connection with how good a job they thought was being done. And, like tipping, people might feel obligated to give something even if the job were only barely satisfactory; however bad the service, few of us have the temerity to leave no tip at all.
LOCATION: 2786

These arguments suggest that it may be possible to defend against foreign nations by voluntary means. They do not prove that it will be; I am only balancing one imperfect system against another and trying to guess which will work better. What if the balance goes the other way? What will I do if, when all other functions of our government have been abolished, I conclude that there is no effective way to defend against aggressive foreign governments save by national defense financed by taxes—financed, in other words, by money taken by force from the taxpayers? In such a situation I would not try to abolish that last vestige of government. I do not like paying taxes, but I would rather pay them to Washington than to Moscow—the rates are lower. I would still regard the government as a criminal organization, but one which was, by a freak of fate, temporarily useful. It would be like a gang of bandits who, while occasionally robbing the villages in their territory, served to keep off other and more rapacious gangs. I do not approve of any government but I will tolerate one so long as the only other choice is another and worse government. Meanwhile, I would do my best to develop voluntary institutions that might eventually take over the business of defense. That is what I meant when I said, near the beginning of this book, that I thought all government functions were divided into two classes, those we could do away with today and those we hope to be able to do away with tomorrow.
LOCATION: 2809

My own preference is for the sort of economic institutions which have been named, I think by Robert LeFevre, agoric. Under agoric institutions almost everyone is self-employed. Instead of corporations there are large groups of entrepreneurs related by trade rather than authority. Each sells not his time but what his time produces. As a freelance writer (one of my professions), I am part of an agoric economic order.
LOCATION: 2836

The actual arrangements by which the market provides an economic good, be it food or police protection, are the product of the ingenuity of all the entrepreneurs producing that good. It would be foolish for me to predict with any confidence what will turn out to be the cheapest and most satisfactory ways of producing the services now produced by government. Even so, I am at least one step ahead of the Marxists, who predict the eventual withering away of the state but offer no real description, tentative or otherwise, of what a stateless society might be like.
LOCATION: 2841

Why, then, do I take as my objective a society of completely voluntary institutions, of total private property? Would it not be better to have a severely limited government doing those few things which it could do better? Perhaps it would be—if the government stayed that way. Here we run into the problem discussed in Chapter 4. One cannot simply build any imaginable characteristics into a government; governments have their own internal dynamic. And the internal dynamic of limited governments is something with which we, to our sorrow, have a good deal of practical experience. It took about 150 years, starting with a Bill of Rights that reserved to the states and the people all powers not explicitly delegated to the federal government, to produce a Supreme Court willing to rule that growing corn to feed to your own hogs is interstate commerce and can therefore be regulated by Congress.
LOCATION: 2854

The logic of limited governments is to grow. There are obvious reasons for that in the nature of government, and plenty of evidence. Constitutions provide, at the most, a modest and temporary restraint. As Murray Rothbard is supposed to have said, the idea of a limited government that stays limited is truly Utopian. Anarchy at least might work; limited government has been tried.
LOCATION: 2868

Anarchist institutions cannot guarantee that protectors will never become rulers, but they decrease the power that protectors have separately or together and they put at the head of protection agencies men who are less likely than politicians to regard theft as a congenial profession. For all these reasons I believe that anarchist institutions, if they can be established and maintained, will be better than any government, even one initially limited and constitutional. I am willing to accept a slightly less than optimal production of a few public goods in exchange for the security of there being no government to expand into the 95 percent of human affairs where it can do nothing but damage. The ultimate objective of my political actions is not limited government. It is anarchy.
LOCATION: 2879

It is important to know what road we must take, but it is also important to know where we want to go. In order to understand our position ourselves and explain it to others we must know what we ultimately want, not just what compromises we may be forced to accept.
LOCATION: 2888

When people view anarchy as the ultimate evil it is not because they are concerned about mail not being delivered or streets not being cleaned. They are afraid of theft, murder, and rape, riot and arson. The greater these fears, the greater the degree of government tyranny which people will tolerate, even support. Civil disorder leads to more government, not less. It may topple one government but it creates a situation in which people desire another and stronger.
LOCATION: 2907

Successful revolutionaries do occasionally end up in positions of power but they seem more likely, on the historical record, to end up dead, courtesy of their comrades. In any case, revolution has its own logic and it is, like that of politics, a logic of power. So revolution, like politics, selects out for success those with the desire and ability to wield power. A libertarian is defeated before the game starts. And by the time the revolution is successful, the population will want nothing so much as order and security. If those who began the revolution have scruples about providing what they want, someone else will be found to end it.
LOCATION: 2925

If there is a plentiful supply of qualified thieves or if the qualities required for theft are roughly the same as those required in other professions, the benefit to the thieves from the existence of theft will be small. If, in addition, the number of thieves is a sizable part of the population, the thieves themselves may be worse off because of the existence of theft. There is, after all, no honor among thieves; a man may return from a night of labor only to find that a fellow worker has paid him a call. In addition, the price of the goods thieves buy is increased by the cost of insurance, guards, and the like, necessitated by theft. Thieves themselves may lose more by theft than they make. If moderately rational, they might themselves prefer that theft be impossible.
LOCATION: 2966

This analysis of private theft is useful for understanding the nature of government. Government consists largely of various forms of legalized theft. The same economic principles apply to it as to illegal theft. There is competition both for employment (as politician, bureaucrat, and so on) and for purchasing stolen goods (lobbying for subsidies and other government favors). This competition drives down the income of both politicians and their customers until it reaches its market level. Just as with private theft, individuals are benefited only to the extent that their particular talents are peculiarly suitable for governmental professions. As with private theft, the wealth taken is mostly a net loss, not a transfer. If a million dollars of the taxpayers' money is being handed out, the people competing for it are willing to, and will, spend most of a million dollars to get it, just as a private thief will put in twenty dollars worth of labor to steal twenty-five dollars worth of loot.
LOCATION: 2975

In addition, as with private theft, more resources are consumed by the cost of protection against government: tax lawyers, inefficient allocation of labor and capital in planning enterprises to minimize tax costs instead of to maximize real production, and so on. In the long run, society is probably poorer by more than the total amount stolen.
LOCATION: 2982

Human ability is, I believe, quite generalizable; a man who is good at one thing usually can be good at others. If government were drastically reduced or eliminated, politicians could go into legitimate activities, perhaps as entertainers, perhaps as executives. Most politicians, if they had stayed out of politics, would probably be earning nearly as much as they are now, and if there were no politics everyone's income would be much higher. The abolition of government, although it might lower the relative income of those who now are, or would have become, politicians, would, I suspect, raise their absolute income.
LOCATION: 2991

It seems more reasonable to suppose that there is no ruling class, that we are ruled, rather, by a myriad of quarreling gangs, constantly engaged in stealing from each other to the great impoverishment of their own members as well as the rest of us.
LOCATION: 3004

Many discussions of democracy assume that these costs are essentially zero, that if 60 percent of the people want something it will get done. But that is true only for very simple issues. More often, the cost of finding out what is really going on and influencing it is substantial. One cannot simply go to the polls and vote for the good guys; no candidate takes 'I am a bad guy' as his campaign slogan. The political process can be viewed as a peculiar sort of economic process, intermediate between a grocery store and a horse race. Each voter decides what cost he is willing to bear in trying to get the laws he wants according to how likely his efforts are to succeed and how valuable such success may be. He buys law. And, by the nature of the peculiar marketplace on which we buy law, we are likely to buy more bad law than good. For good law, like national defense, is a public good.
LOCATION: 3025

Consider a specific example. I have a choice of two ways of making $1,000; both are political. The first way is to work for the repeal of an enormous number of different special interest laws—CAB and ICC price-fixing, agricultural subsidies, oil quotas, and so on ad nauseam—each of which costs me from a few cents to a few hundred dollars a year. The second way is by working to pass one more special interest law which will benefit a small special interest of which I am a member and will cost everyone else a few dollars. If I have no moral preference for one method over the other, I will choose the second; it is enormously easier to pass one law than to repeal a hundred. The first method not only benefits me, it benefits everyone else—but I get nothing from that. The second method benefits me and a few others and harms everyone else—but that costs me nothing. Even if I am just as willing to make money in a way that benefits others as in a way that harms them, the existence of governmental institutions makes it enormously easier for me to do the latter. The result is that in a society such as ours, in which most people would rather produce than steal, we all spend a significant part of our time using the law to steal from each other.
LOCATION: 3038

The theory of democracy may be, as Mencken said, that the common people know what they want and deserve to get it, good and hard. The practice of democracy is that people get something a good deal worse than they either want or deserve.
LOCATION: 3047

Let me repeat the argument once more. The producer of a public good can get only a part of the value of producing that good. Therefore a public good is produced only if it is worth much more than it costs. The producer of a private good gets virtually all the value (by selling it for what it is worth, usually) and so produces it whenever it is worth more than it costs. Thus public goods are underproduced relative to private goods. Under the institutions of government, bad laws, laws that benefit special interests at the expense of the rest of us, are private goods (more precisely, they are more nearly private goods than are good laws), and good laws, laws that benefit everyone, are public goods. Under an anarchy good laws are private goods and bad laws are public goods. Public goods are underproduced. The citizens of a government get worse laws than they deserve. The inhabitants of an anarchy get better. It is no more than a slightly exuberant exaggeration to say that a government functions properly only if it is made up exclusively of saints and an anarchy fails only if it is inhabited exclusively by devils.
LOCATION: 3067

In the technical sense in which I use the term, the benefits of increased government spending are usually less of a public good than the costs, since the taxes that pay for a given program are usually more evenly distributed than the benefits of the program.
LOCATION: 3077

Most particular government activities beyond the most fundamental exist because they benefit some special interest at the cost of the rest of us. Each special interest will fight, in most cases successfully, to protect its private racket. Yet the individuals who make up that special interest are on the receiving end of everyone else's racket. Most of them lose, on net, by the whole transaction. To the extent that they realize this, they should support general reductions in government power. So the fundamental task is one of education.
LOCATION: 3088

Even if these strategies are highly successful, government will continue for some decades to wield enormous powers and spend huge sums. Fortunately politicians, although usually in favor of expanding their own power, are not motivated by any altruistic desire to guarantee the oppression of our grandchildren. It may often be possible to propose a step that benefits an incumbent politician in the short run but reduces the total power of government in the long run. An example is the voucher plan described in Chapter 10. It has been supported, in a limited form, by a number of powerful politicians, including at least one governor. I do not credit the governor with a passionate dedication to reducing the power of his office, merely with the desire to use Catholic votes to keep such power as he already had.
LOCATION: 3104

One of the central libertarian ideas is that command, hierarchy, is not the only way of getting things done, usually not even the best way. Having rejected politics as a way of running the country there is no reason for us to accept politics as the way to run the conspiracy to abolish politics.
LOCATION: 3120

The longer I have thought about these issues, the more convinced I have become that arguments about fundamental moral principles do not provide answers to enough important questions. In particular, they provide no answer and no way of getting an answer to a whole range of questions about where to draw lines.
LOCATION: 3232

A host of similar problems arise in specifying the rules of a legal system designed to enforce libertarian rights in a libertarian way. A criminal trial rarely if ever produces a certainty of guilt. If you jail or fine someone after concluding that there is a 98 percent chance that he has committed a crime, there remains a two percent chance that you are violating the rights of someone who is innocent. Does that mean that you can never punish anyone unless you are a hundred percent certain he is guilty? If not, how in principle do libertarian moral principles tell you what degree of proof should be necessary for conviction and punishment?
LOCATION: 3251

Our response to such questions demonstrates that we do not really believe in simple single values. Most libertarians, myself among them, believe that a libertarian society is both just and attractive. It is easy enough to claim that we are in favor of following libertarian principle whatever the consequences, given that we believe the consequences would be the most attractive society the world has ever known. But the claim that we put individual rights above everything else is, for most of us, false. Although we give some value, perhaps very great value, to individual rights, we do not give them an infinite value. We can pretend the contrary only by resolutely refusing to consider situations in which we might have to choose between individual rights and other things that are also of great value.
LOCATION: 3349

My purpose is not to argue that we should stop being libertarians. My purpose is to argue that libertarianism is not a collection of straightforward and unambiguous arguments establishing with certainty a set of unquestionable propositions. It is rather the attempt to apply certain economic and ethical insights to a very complicated world. The more carefully one does so, the more complications one is likely to discover and the more qualifications one must put on one's results.
LOCATION: 3355

What we do believe, or at least what many of us believe, is that each of us knows more about his own values than most other people do and that people are therefore usually better off deciding what they want for themselves. That is one of the main arguments in favor of a free society.
LOCATION: 3404

Utilitarianism is a possible moral rule. The difficulties of applying it to real world problems are substantial, but so are the difficulties of applying an alternative rule such as minimizing coercion. One would face very similar problems in defining and measuring the amount of coercion and in judging the tradeoff between increased coercion for one person and decreased coercion for another.
LOCATION: 3425

So one reason to base my arguments on consequences rather than justice is that people have widely varying ideas about what is just but generally agree that making people happy and prosperous is a good thing. If I argue against heroin laws on the grounds that they violate the addicts' rights, I will convince only other libertarians. If I argue that drug laws, by making drugs enormously more expensive, are the chief cause of drug-related crime, and that the poor quality control typical of an illegal market is the main source of drug-related deaths, I may convince even people who do not believe that drug addicts have rights.
LOCATION: 3448

There seems to be a close correlation between rules that make people free and rules that make them happy; that is why it was the East Germans and not the West Germans who erected barbed wire fences and guard towers on their common border. Perhaps that correlation comes from some deep connection between freedom and happiness, perhaps it is merely an accident. In any case, it is there. I conclude that by figuring out what legal rules would best make people happy I may learn something about what legal rules are suitable for a free society.
LOCATION: 3487

Taxing the rich and giving the money to the poor may be an economic worsening, due to collection costs and disincentives, and yet a utilitarian improvement. My reasons for disagreeing with that conclusion are two. The first is that since the poor are, as a rule, politically weak, they are at least as likely to be the victims of governmental income transfers as they are to be the beneficiaries. That is the point that I made in Chapter 4. The second is that the struggle among groups trying to make themselves beneficiaries rather than victims is likely to be an expensive one, making practically all of us, rich and poor, worse off in a society that permits such redistribution than in one that does not.
LOCATION: 3595

Suppose the apple is worth two dollars to you and four dollars to me. Instead of buying it for three dollars I sneak into your orchard at night and steal it, at a cost of a dollar's worth of time and effort. You are worse off by two dollars (the value of the apple to you) and I am better off by three dollars (the value of the apple to me minus the cost to me of getting it), so there is a net gain of one dollar; my stealing the apple is an economic improvement over my not getting it at all. But not getting the apple is not the only alternative; I could have bought it instead. Stealing the apple is worse than buying the apple, since that would have produced a net gain of two dollars. An efficient legal system will include some way of making it in the interest of people who want apples to buy them instead of stealing them. That is why we punish thieves.
LOCATION: 3614

Imprisonment and execution serve at least as well as fines to discourage people from violating other people's property rights, but the cost to the criminal is no longer a benefit to someone else. When the criminal loses his life, nobody else gets an extra life in exchange. When you are imprisoned, nobody gets the freedom you lose and someone must pay the additional cost of maintaining the prison.
LOCATION: 3654

Where transactions between the two parties are easily arranged, as in the case where only two neighbors are involved, there is much to be said for an absolute right to forbid backed up by punitive damages. That way the court does not have to engage in the difficult task of measuring the value to me of not being blown up or of being kept awake. If what my neighbor wants to do is sufficiently important to him he can offer to buy my permission—or my land. But where transactions are impractical, a damage rule may be the best solution. It is not practical to buy the right to emit unpleasant fumes from all of the three thousand people who can occasionally smell what comes out of my smokestack. Even if it is worth much more to me to be able to run my factory than it is to them not to smell it, I will not be able to buy the permission of all of them. I face the same sort of bargaining problem as in the previous case of trespassing photons; one holdout can prevent the entire deal. Efficient legal rules might allocate the relevant right to my neighbors instead of to me but make it a right to collect damages rather than a right to close down the factory.
LOCATION: 3771

One obvious objection to such a system is that someone sufficiently powerful, where power is measured by how many friends and relatives you have, how loyal they are, and how good they are at fighting, can defy the law with impunity, at least when dealing with less powerful individuals. The Icelandic system had a simple and elegant solution to that problem. A claim for damages was a piece of transferable property. If you had injured me and I was too weak to enforce my claim, I could sell or give it to someone stronger. It was then in his interest to enforce the claim in order both to collect the damages and to establish his own reputation for use in future conflicts.
LOCATION: 3861

In medieval Iceland all law was civil. The victim was responsible for prosecuting and enforcing his claim, individually or with the assistance of others. The victim who transferred his claim to some more powerful individual in exchange for half what he was owed was like a plaintiff who agrees to split the damages with his lawyer instead of paying him a fee. It could be argued that even if this provides a workable way of enforcing the law, it is unfair. Why should the victim of an aggressor have to give up part or all of the damages owed him in order to win his case? Perhaps it is unfair, but less so than the system under which we now live. Under our system, the victim of a civil offense, like the injured Icelander, must pay the cost of proving his case, while the victim of a criminal offense gets no damages at all unless he files, pays for, and wins a parallel civil suit.
LOCATION: 3875

A powerful chieftain who wished to defy the law, as some certainly did, faced two problems. The first has already been discussed; his victim could transfer his claim to someone who was also a powerful chieftain. The second was that, under the Icelandic system, the party who lost a court case and ignored the verdict was in an inherently weak position. Many of his friends might refuse to support him. Even if he had supporters, every fight would create a new set of law cases which his side would lose. If someone on the other side was killed, his kinsmen would expect to collect wergeld; if it was not paid, they would join the coalition against the outlaw. Thus the coalition against someone who defied the law would tend to expand. As long as power was reasonably well distributed so that no single faction had anything approaching half the fighters in Iceland on its side, the system was, in essence, self-enforcing.
LOCATION: 3906

The Icelandic system finally collapsed in the thirteenth century, more than three hundred years after it was established. The collapse was preceded by a period of about fifty years characterized by a relatively high level of violence. According to an estimate by one scholar, deaths from violence during the final period of collapse (calculated by going through the relevant historical sagas and adding up the bodies) totaled about 350. That comes to 7 deaths a year in a population of about 70,000, or about one death per ten thousand per year. That is comparable to our highway death rate or to our combined rates for murder and non-negligent manslaughter. If the calculation is correct, it suggests that even during what the Icelanders regarded as the final period of catastrophic breakdown their society was not substantially more violent than ours. To put the comparison in terms of contemporary societies, one may note that in three weeks of the year 1066 Norway, Normandy, and England probably lost as large a fraction of their combined population to violence (in the battles of Fulford, Stamford Bridge, and Hastings) as Iceland did in fifty years of feuds.
LOCATION: 3930

That my nation is independent merely means that I am ruled by people who happen to live near me.
LOCATION: 3996

Allying with unattractive governments does not merely mean offering to help them against our common external enemies. Oppressive governments have internal enemies as well. If we are not willing to provide such governments with the assistance they need to stay in power, they will find other allies with fewer scruples. So, in practice, an alliance with the Shah cannot be limited to defense against a Russian invasion. It also includes arming and training the secret police.
LOCATION: 4004

Both interventionist and non-interventionist foreign policies involve, for libertarians, the same moral dilemma. Under an interventionist policy we defend ourselves, when it seems necessary, by helping the governments we ally with to oppress their citizens. Under a non-interventionist policy we defend ourselves, when it seems necessary, by killing innocent citizens of the governments we are fighting against.
LOCATION: 4018

The weak point in the argument is its assumption that the interventionist foreign policy will be done well—that your foreign minister is Machiavelli or Metternich. In order for the policy to work, you must correctly figure out which countries are going to be your enemies and which your allies ten years down the road. If you get it wrong, you find yourself unnecessarily blundering into other people's wars, spending your blood and treasure in their fights instead of theirs in yours. You may, to take an example not entirely at random, get into one war as a result of trying to defend China from Japan, spend the next thirty years trying to defend Japan (and Korea, and Vietnam,. ..) from China, then finally discover that the Chinese are your natural allies against the Soviet Union.
LOCATION: 4065

But exactly the same thing can be said of the Post Office. One of the reasons it appears badly run is that postal jobs are political plums used to reward faithful supporters of the party in power. When one describes government as incompetent to achieve its objectives, one is speaking metaphorically; the government is not a person. It does not have objectives any more than it has hands or feet or ideas. What I mean by saying that government does a bad job of running the Post Office is that one consequence of many individuals using the government to achieve their own objectives is that the mail gets delivered infrequently and late. What I mean by saying that government does a bad job of running our foreign policy is that another outcome of individuals using the government to achieve their own objectives is a foreign policy poorly designed to defend the U.S. Whether the reason is incompetence or corruption is irrelevant.
LOCATION: 4087

There is a lesson to be drawn from Munich, but it is a different lesson than is usually drawn. At the time of the Munich agreement, England and France had interventionist foreign policies; that is why Hitler made sure he had their permission before he invaded the Sudetenland. If they made the wrong decision and missed their opportunity to prevent World War II, that is evidence of what is wrong with the usual argument for such a policy. One should not base decisions about what kinds of things a government should do on the assumption that it will always do them well.
LOCATION: 4093

The case against a non-interventionist policy starts with the observation that Western Europe and Japan possess a large part of the world's resources. By resources I do not mean natural resources. In the modern world, natural resources have very little to do with world power; that is why Australia, Canada, Kuwait, Zaire, and Zimbabwe are not world powers and Japan is. When I say that Japan and Western Europe have a large part of the world's resources I mean that they have skilled workers, machines for those workers to use and political and social institutions which result in those workers and machines producing lots of useful things. It seems likely that if those areas were conquered by the Soviet Union, the Soviet Union would become a more dangerous enemy than it now is. It would seem to follow that the U.S., in its own interest, must defend Japan and Western Europe. But the same things which make those countries worth conquering also make them capable of defending themselves. West Germany, France, and Japan have each about half the GNP of the Soviet Union—Japan somewhat more, West Germany and France somewhat less. The combined GNP of the Western European countries, their ability to build tanks and fighters and missiles, is greater than the GNP of the Soviet Union and its satellites.
LOCATION: 4105

One advantage to having West Germany and Japan defended primarily by Germans and Japanese is that it should substantially reduce the possibility of war by miscalculation. Suppose that, under the present system, the Soviets are considering an invasion of Western Europe. They will ask themselves whether the U.S. is willing to risk its own nuclear destruction in order to save its allies. They may decide the answer is no, and invade. Whether they are right or wrong, the result, from the standpoint of both Americans and Europeans, is an unfortunate one. The Soviets may reasonably doubt whether the U.S. is willing to start World War III in order to defend Germany or France. There is much less doubt that Germany or France would be willing to. So a world in which major countries are responsible for their own defense is likely to be a good deal safer than one in which they depend on us.
LOCATION: 4125

There is a second reason why the world produced by a non-interventionist foreign policy might be safer than the world we now live in. Since World War II we have had a two-power world—historically an unusual situation. It seems likely that a two-power world is inherently less stable than a many-power world. If there are only two great powers and one of them manages to defeat the other without being totally wiped out in the process, it has won the whole game. If one of the two powers has a temporary lead it may be tempted to attack, since if it does not the situation might reverse. If, on the other hand, there are five or six great powers, then a successful war by A against B simply means that C through F pick up the pieces. That is a good reason for A not to attack B.
LOCATION: 4132

In another sense, I believe that there is a libertarian foreign policy—a foreign policy which libertarians can expect to work better than alternative policies. That policy is to defend ourselves by fighting those who actually attack us rather than by maintaining a global network of alliances. The argument is a simple one. An interventionist policy done badly is very much worse than one not done at all, and we can be sure that an interventionist foreign policy run by the U.S. government will be done badly.
LOCATION: 4148

The first time that Hitler attempted to annex Austria it was Mussolini who stopped him, announcing that Italy would not tolerate such an annexation and making his point by moving Italian divisions into the Brenner pass. What changed that was the response of the western powers to the Italian invasion of Abyssinia. In Churchill’s view they should either have ignored the invasion in order to keep Italy as an ally or intervened with naval force to prevent it, bringing down Mussolini’s government. What they did instead was to voice their opposition without doing much of anything. Mussolini concluded, first, that they were not his friends, and second that they were not very dangerous enemies. The next time Hitler moved against Austria, it was with Mussolini’s permission. The interventionist policy of France and England had given Hitler his first significant ally.]
LOCATION: 4162

The fundamental problem with government money is not that government cannot provide stable money but that it is not always in its interest to do so. Inflation via the printing press is a way in which the government can spend money without collecting taxes. It may also be politically profitable as a device to benefit debtors at the expense of creditors, especially when the government is itself a major debtor. Other forms of monetary instability are often a result of attempts to manipulate economic variables such as the unemployment rate for short-run political objectives. This suggests that instead of arguing about whether our government should return to the gold standard we should instead be thinking about whether the government should produce money at all.
LOCATION: 4173

There are a number of ways in which banks can protect themselves. One is to hold assets, such as loans and bonds, whose market value is fixed in money rather than in real terms. Another is to start with total assets larger than total liabilities, so as to guarantee to their depositors that even if the bank loses money it can still fulfill its obligations. A historical example is the Scottish banking system described by Adam Smith and, more recently and in more detail, by Lawrence White; the banks were partnerships and the partners were generally wealthy men. Since they were not protected by limited liability, the partners were individually liable for the debts of the bank. The depositors could lose their money only if the bank's net liabilities exceeded the combined fortunes of the partners. Several of the banks did fail, but in most cases the depositors were paid off in full.
LOCATION: 4214

Such a system would work, in practice, very much like an ideal fiat system in which the monetary authority maintains a stable price level by appropriate manipulation of the money supply. Under a commodity bundle system, if the money supply increased to the point where the bundle was worth more than 100,000 dollars, holders of dollars would turn them in for commodities, bringing the money supply and the price level back down. If the money supply fell so that the commodities were worth less than the money, banks would find that they could issue additional money without any of it being turned in for commodities and the money supply would rise. The system as a whole would therefore stabilize prices in such a way as to make the price of the bundle, a crude price index, stable at its face value.
LOCATION: 4262

The advantage of this system over a government-run fiat system is that it does not rely on the wisdom or benevolence of the people appointed to manage the money supply. It provides a mechanism for making it in the interest of the private people controlling the money supply to behave in exactly the way we would want the officials controlling a government fiat system to behave. Since the nature of the reserves in this system makes it unnecessary for the banks to hold any significant quantity of them, such a system is, in effect, a fiat system in which the obligation to redeem the currency in commodities forces the people controlling the money supply to maintain stable prices.
LOCATION: 4268

An inflation rate of twelve percent a year corresponds, for an individual holding a hundred dollars in currency, to an implicit tax of a dollar a month. That is a small price to pay for the convenience of using the same money as everyone else, which is why even quite badly run fiat systems continue to be used.
LOCATION: 4277

In the short run, we may well be stuck with government money. But we should abandon the idea that such a system is either desirable or inevitable. Money can and should be produced on the market. Like education, it is too important to be left in the hands of government.
LOCATION: 4296

The political game is played for control over the collection and expenditure of hundreds of billions of dollars a year. Even a relatively weak player in that game—a party, let us say, that gets five or ten percent of the votes in a national election and holds a few seats in Congress—has favors to dispense worth quite a lot of money.
LOCATION: 4319

A political party is driven by two objectives. It wishes to proclaim positions and take actions that appeal to its ideological supporters. But it also wishes to attract as many votes as possible in order to maximize its political assets. Having attracted these votes it wishes to act in such a way as to maximize its long-run income. On some issues these objectives may prove to be consistent. On others they will not.
LOCATION: 4322

Suppose the party begins to win elections. It occurs to some people that positions of power within the party may, in the long run, be worth quite a lot of money. Some of the people to whom this occurs may be nonideological and willing to proclaim any ideology they find convenient. Others may be vaguely libertarian, but with a greater commitment to their short-run private objectives than to their long-run public ones. What these people have in common is their willingness to make a profession of gaining power within the party. In the long run, in the struggle for power, professionals will beat amateurs. It is as certain as anything can be in politics that once a party achieves substantial political power it will eventually swing towards a policy in which ideology is a means, perhaps an important means, not an end. It will become a vote- and income-maximizing party, taking positions dictated by its ideology when that seems the best way of getting votes or the volunteer labor and money it requires in order to get votes, and taking actions inconsistent with its ideology when such actions yield the party a net profit, in votes or dollars. We already have two parties like that; I see no advantage to having a third.
LOCATION: 4329

“In total, during the first eighty-eight years of this century, almost 170,000,000 men, women, and children have been shot, beaten, tortured, knifed, burned, starved, frozen, crushed, or worked to death; or buried alive, drowned, hung, bombed, or killed in any other of the myriad ways governments have inflicted death on unarmed, helpless citizens or foreigners.” R.J. Rummel, Death by Government.
LOCATION: 4498

It is stateless and decentralized, and its basic logic is quite simple: If you wrong me, I threaten to harm you unless I am compensated for the wrong. There is one requirement in order for such a system to function as law enforcement rather than extortion—that my threat to harm you is more believable if you actually have wronged me than if you have not. There must be some reason why right makes might.
LOCATION: 4516

The reason I do all of these things is not that I want to be sure I am acting justly; as it happens, I am quite sure you stole my cow, having seen you go off with it. The reason is that I want to make the offer attractive enough so that if you were innocent you would accept it. If you refuse, our neighbors will conclude that you are guilty. Not only will they not object to my threatening force against you, they may offer to help, since you might steal one of their cows next. If you accept, the arbitrator rules against you, and you then refuse to pay me the damages he adjudges, they again conclude that you are the guilty party, again accept, perhaps assist, my use of force against you. It follows that if you are guilty and I can prove it to a neutral arbitrator, your only practical option is to pay up.
LOCATION: 4594

Proofs about how alternative legal or social or economic systems will work are hard to come by. But that evidence at least suggests that a decentralized legal system may be able to settle fundamental conflicts somewhat more easily than a centralized system. One possible reason is that it has less need of uniformity—for many, although not all, issues, it can let different people function under different rules. One of the terms of the settlement of the original Christian/Pagan conflict was that, while Christianity became the official religion, private pagan worship was still permitted.
LOCATION: 4627

A different way of looking at the situation is to say that both Bill and Arnold have an incentive to establish a reputation for keeping their contracts, since that will permit further cooperation in the future—the discipline of constant dealings discussed back in Chapter 29 when I was explaining why firms would abide by their arbitration agreements.
LOCATION: 4706

Schelling points help us understand why the discipline of constant dealings works, because people perceive “always keep your word” as a unique policy, hence a Schelling point on which bargainers can converge.
LOCATION: 4715

A different way of putting the point is that, if you give in to your neighbor’s attempt at small scale extortion, there is no obvious limit to how far it will go. There are, after all, quite a lot of other ways in which he, or other people, could impose costs on you or demand payment not to. By adopting a policy of resisting such demands even at considerable cost, you give other people an incentive not to make them. If they do not make them, you do not need to bear the cost of resisting them.
LOCATION: 4769

The logic of the situation does not depend on the existence of either law or shared moral beliefs. All it requires is that both of you know what rights you claim and both of you know that the claim is unique, that you cannot believably insist that your rights consist of no trash plus his paying you a modest tribute any more than he can insist on the same terms the other way around.
LOCATION: 4778

I emphasize this point because one possible explanation of social order is morality, individuals refraining from murder, rape, and robbery because they believe such actions are wrong. That is a possible explanation, but not the one I am offering here. My claim is that even without moral agreement, even without any moral belief at all, a pattern of consistent commitment strategies makes coordination possible.
LOCATION: 4804

More generally, my rights are whatever I am successfully committed to defend, where success depends in part on other people recognizing my commitment and having no commitment of their own that directly clashes with it.
LOCATION: 4841

A government is an institution against which people have dropped the commitment strategies that defend what they view as their rights against other people. An anarchy is a society in which there is no such institution. An anarchist is someone who sees such a society as desirable. All of that was, I think, implicit in Chapter 28, where I defined a government as an agency of legitimized coercion.
LOCATION: 4845

The same problem exists in economics. “Competition” sounds as though it should describe something like a chess game or a horse race, with each competitor trying to beat out his rivals. Such a situation exists in fields with only a small number of companies: Microsoft vs Apple, Apple vs Google, Ford vs GM. Economists call it “imperfect competition.” What we call perfect competition is a market with many firms, each so small that it can ignore the effect of any other firm on it and its own effect on the market. The wheat market is perfectly competitive, the auto market or the cell phone market is not.
LOCATION: 4868

A market failure is a situation where individual rationality does not lead to group rationality. If each individual makes the right decision, the group make the wrong decision. In the extreme case, every individual ends up worse off than if each of them had made a different decision.
LOCATION: 4885

Market failure, as I hope I have convinced you, is a real problem. Although imperfect solutions can sometimes be found—I described some back in Chapter 34 and could have described others—there is no guarantee that goods worth producing will get produced, that armies will stand and fight instead of running away and being slaughtered, that traffic intersections will not jam. I hope I have also convinced you, with my choice of examples, that it is not a problem limited to the free market. It can occur in any situation where individuals are making decisions that affect both themselves and others.
LOCATION: 4927

But although rationality is not a perfect description of human behavior, it may be the best assumption available for predicting the behavior of large numbers of strangers.
LOCATION: 4937

For economists, that is the standard justification for many, perhaps all, government actions. Public goods are underproduced, so tax people to pay to produce them—not only national defense, as discussed back in Chapter 34, but scientific research as well. Negative externalities are overproduced, so regulate pollution, tax the production of carbon dioxide to reduce global warming. Positive externalities are underproduced, so subsidize education. In some specific cases the argument is weaker than it first appears, a point I will return to in Chapter 64. But the underlying logic is correct. It follows that even rational individuals can sometimes be made better off by restricting the choices they are permitted to make. One response sometimes offered by libertarians is to deny the existence of market failure. There is a better one.
LOCATION: 4941

Market failure exists on the ordinary private market. Its existence implies that we could sometimes be made better if a sufficiently wise and benevolent authority made some of our decisions for us. But, in the real world, the alternative to laissez-faire is not rule by a benevolent and supremely competent dictator, it is having decisions made on the political market instead of the private market.
LOCATION: 4956

That is a simplified model of a market economy, but at least it is a first approximation. Individual actors usually receive most of the benefit and pay most of the cost of their actions, making market failure the exception, not the rule. On the political market individual actors—voters, politicians, lobbyists, judges, policemen—almost never bear much of the cost of their actions or receive much of the benefit. Hence market failure, the exception on the private market, is the rule on the political market.
LOCATION: 4966

It follows that although the market has some tendency to produce efficient law, law that maximizes the benefit to those who live under it, the tendency is imperfect; the desires of marginal customers are weighted more heavily than those of customers who strongly prefer their agency to any of its competitors.
LOCATION: 5029

A similar situation will exist for pollution law, where Anne's right to sue Bill for polluting her air results in a reduction of Bill's emissions and thus an external benefit for Anne's neighbor Carl. It may exist in other important contexts as well. In all of these cases, we would expect the legal rules generated by the private market to be less than perfectly efficient. They should still be better than the rules generated by political mechanisms under our current system, since we have little theoretical reason to expect those legal rules to be efficient at all. From that standpoint, this chapter is offering a special case of the argument of the previous chapter. Market failure sometimes exists on the private market. On the political market it is the rule.
LOCATION: 5071

An actual society, a civil order, embodies a set of compromises, giving each participant enough of what he wants and believes he is entitled to get so that he does not find it worth trying, with his allies, to forcibly overthrow the system and substitute one closer to his desires. One of the things determining just what that set of compromises is will be the ability of the various factions to win a civil war if it happens, to successfully violate legal rules its members disagree with but others want and get, to win out if the order breaks down. In that sense, a mutual threat game underlies not only the stateless order I proposed in part III but every society.
LOCATION: 5109

Viewing the social contract as a peace treaty formed in response to the implicit or explicit threat of violent conflict explains what it is but does not give it moral force.
LOCATION: 5117

The implication of this analysis for my proposed stateless society is that rights enforcement agencies are producing two different sorts of products, only one of which was included in the analysis of part III of this book. That one is the service of enforcing rights, negotiating legal agreements, settling disputes. The other is the service of threatening other enforcement agencies in order to get the legal rules their customers prefer on the best possible terms—or, alternatively, to make sure that if they do not get them they get compensated for going along with the terms preferred by the customers of other agencies. It follows that my reasons for believing that economies of scale in the industry will not be sufficient to produce very large firms are weaker than I thought. Even if economies of scale in rights enforcement and related activities are not sufficient to produce large firms, economies of scale in the ability to threaten other agencies might be.
LOCATION: 5119

If the professionals tried to seize power, they would be outnumbered by about three hundred to one. In case of war, the large size of the militia combined with the skills of the regulars would, with luck, make up for the militia’s low quality. It was an ingenious solution and one that worked, judged at least by the nonexistence so far of either foreign conquest or military coup.
LOCATION: 5163

Paintball and SCA combat are fun and exciting. They could be even more fun if there was more of a point to them, if the participants believed that in addition to playing a game, they were also training to protect themselves, their loved ones, the society they lived in. Structure the institutions right and you have the labor for your militia and at least part of the gear for free. Not that different from the militia contemplated by the Constitution.
LOCATION: 5181

I have offered a rough blueprint for fielding a very large militia at a very low cost. There remains the problem of coordination, of how to get millions of volunteers divided into thousands of independent units to work together. For that we require professionals—funded, as many functions are funded already, by charity. It should not take too much charity, since we do not need very many of them.
LOCATION: 5225

On the other hand, that mechanism shares with the original system of the Constitution one important advantage over a more centralized system: The army it creates is poorly suited to pull off a military coup. The militia is made up of a multitude of different groups with different views and loyalties and it outnumbers the professionals a hundred, perhaps a thousand, to one.
LOCATION: 5242

While I, like everyone else, hold views about right and wrong, I do not believe I have any way of showing that those views are correct. I can try to tease out the structure of my beliefs by introspection. I can attempt to construct an internally consistent account of them, and similarly for what I can deduce about other people’s beliefs. But since I cannot show that my beliefs are true, arguments based on them strike me as less useful for persuading reasonable people of my political conclusions than arguments that use economics to deduce the consequences of the institutions I favor and try to show that those consequences are desirable in terms not only of my values but of the values of those I wish to persuade.
LOCATION: 5247

The harder it is for people to move from one country to another, the more politically attractive redistribution is. The possibility of redistribution tends to increase inefficient migration, but the possibility of migration tends to decrease inefficient redistribution.
LOCATION: 5350

While I have not seen this argument used in discussions of international migration, it is a commonplace in discussions of interstate migration. American supporters of the welfare state routinely argue that welfare ought to be federal rather than state, precisely because state welfare is held down by the threat of interstate migration. Indeed, one possible explanation for why the U.S. moved more slowly than European countries towards a welfare state is that European redistribution was by national governments with control over immigration, whereas American redistribution was largely by state governments without such control.
LOCATION: 5357

For those who see income redistribution as undesirable, in part because it leads people to divert their efforts away from productive activities into attempts to maximize the transfers they receive and minimize those they pay, this is an argument in favor of free immigration. Those who approve of the welfare state, on the other hand, may see it as an argument against. But they ought to consider that maintaining immigration barriers in order to protect the welfare state means protecting poor Americans at the cost of potential  immigrants who are much poorer, reducing national inequality but increasing world inequality.
LOCATION: 5366

What the argument implies is that, to the extent that you are engaged in voluntary  interactions with people who correctly perceive what you will or will not do, it is in your self-interest to be committed to act in ways that maximize the summed benefit to the group of people with whom you are interacting. The value to the other people of dealing with someone so committed, which should show up in the terms they are willing to offer you, is greater than the cost to you. Virtue pays.
LOCATION: 5535

In the market society, since most people who associate with me do so only if they think they benefit by the association, there are costs to being dishonest and benefits to being honest. If you are a worker in a centrally planned society, on the other hand, your job is determined and your salary set by someone far away who does not know you and will not have to associate with you. It follows that the dishonest employee will have the same opportunities as the honest one—and the additional opportunity to steal things when nobody is looking.
LOCATION: 5543

The implication of this argument is that a market society will have nicer people than either a traditional or a centrally planned society. Virtues will have a higher payoff, so more people will be honest. Vices will have a lower payoff, so fewer will be bullies. The result is precisely the opposite of the claim—that such a society promotes a blind, narrow selfishness—often made by critics of capitalism.
LOCATION: 5550

The view that I eventually came to as a result of losing my argument with Berlin is what philosophers refer to as intuitionism, the claim that there are facts of moral reality that we perceive via moral intuition just as we perceive the facts of physical reality via our physical senses, and that the evidence for the reality of those facts is the considerable, although not perfect, agreement in how different people perceive them.
LOCATION: 5594

The same answer can be made for the difference between a condominium or proprietary community and the government within which it is located. The private developer who created the former had a private incentive to design the best possible political institutions. The more attractive the community association appeared to the purchaser, the higher the price he would be willing to pay for the house. Voters also want to live under desirable institutions, so the political entrepreneur who is creating a new local government or modifying an old one also has some incentive to try to create attractive institutions, but a much weaker one. There are reasons why democracy does not work nearly as well as capitalism.
LOCATION: 5657

Critics of free immigration worry that immigrants might change the country, make it more socialist, more crime ridden, more like the places they are coming from, but offer no strong reason to expect those particular effects. Leaving the place where you grew up to move somewhere very different is, after all, evidence that you prefer the latter.
LOCATION: 5677

I call it a mistake, but perhaps that is unfair. We know that the present is at least tolerable, since we are at present tolerating it. A change might make things better, might make them worse, so why chance it? That sounds like a plausible argument, but it contains a hidden assumption—that stasis is an option, that if we do not have more immigration our cultural and political circumstances will remain the same, that without anthropogenic CO2, climate will stay what it currently is.
LOCATION: 5690

I am not arguing that there is never a good reason to fear change; sometimes a change can be reasonably predicted to have bad consequences. I am arguing that much opposition to change, across a wide range of different topics and disputes, is based on the mistaken assumption that if only that particular change is prevented, the next year, the next decade, the next century, will be more or less the same as the present.
LOCATION: 5712

There is a curious asymmetry to their approach. They took account of low probability high cost consequences of permitting global warming. But, so far as I could tell, they made no similar attempt to take account of low probability, high cost consequences of preventing global warming. That might make sense if we could be confident that, absent the effects of human action, climate would never change. But we have no grounds for such confidence, since climate has been changing, sometimes quite radically, since long before human beings were able to influence it.
LOCATION: 5800

I was young, innocent, and shocked. Here were intelligent people I liked and respected, professional academics, deliberately doing dishonest work. Since then I have been disinclined to take on faith conclusions that come out of academic work on public policy.
LOCATION: 5831

The conventional model of K-12 schooling is based on two assumptions, both wrong. The first is that, out of all the world’s knowledge, there is some subset about the right size to fill K-12 that everyone should learn, or at least be exposed to. The second is that the way to educate children is to sit them down and tell them what some authority, typically teacher and textbook, have decided they should know.
LOCATION: 5836

As all students and most teachers know, the usual result of making someone study something of no interest to him is that he memorizes as much as he has to in order to pass the course then forgets it as rapidly as possible thereafter. People learn things much more easily and remember them longer if they are things they want to learn. Consider the case of a child who actually gets interested in something, whether D&D, batting averages, or dinosaurs.
LOCATION: 5852

Not only is the assumption about how children learn wrong, it teaches a dangerous lesson—that the way to find out what is true is to locate an authority and believe what he tells you. One of the crucial intellectual skills is the ability to judge sources of information on internal evidence, to learn to distinguish between an author or speaker who cares whether what he says is true and one who does not. The conventional model of schooling anti-teaches that skill. The student is presented with two authorities, teacher and textbook, and, unless the teacher is unusually good, expected to believe them. Quite often, judged at least by my experience, that is a mistake. Much of what is taught in school is not true.
LOCATION: 5861

If at some future point they discover that they need something that was left out of their education they can learn it then, a more efficient strategy than trying to learn everything they might ever find useful, most of which they won't.
LOCATION: 5910

Perhaps more important, they did not learn that education was something rather like cod liver oil, good for you but bad tasting, or that reading books is something you do because you are assigned to do it.
LOCATION: 5913

The alternative to a synthetic world is a real world–the one we and our children are living in. If you do not tune your harp, it will not sound very nice when you play it. If you do not tidy up your room at least occasionally, you will not be able to find things you want. If you do not sometimes do things your younger brother wants you to do, he will not do things you want him to do. That world also teaches the lesson that getting what you want sometimes requires doing things you would rather not do. And it gets the causal connection right.
LOCATION: 5932

The child at home adapts to the social rules of the parental environment, at school to the rules of the peer group environment. It is the peer group version that ends up forming most of the adult personality. Harris mentions, as an unusual special case, children for whom the family is the peer group. Home schooling might be one way of getting there. If so, the socialization argument cuts in both directions. Having my children end up with personalities rather like those of myself and my wife rather than personalities modeled on mass American society strikes me as a plus, not a minus.
LOCATION: 5962

One more point about home schooling is that whether it works may depend in large part on the relation between parents and children. If they do not get along, something unfortunately pretty common, it might work very poorly. Of course, one reason they might not get along, although not the only possible reason, is that the children have been socialized in school into viewing their peers as “us” and adults as “them.”     —66—
LOCATION: 5972