The Moon is a Harsh Mistress
Robert A. Heinlein

‘Oh, wonderful!’ Wyoming paid me a long whistle and looked delighted. ‘Everybody should do that!’ ‘Hope not, would show. Let ’em think up own ways to outwit Authority; our family always has. But back to your plan, Wyoh: two things wrong. Never get “solidarity”; blokes like Hauser would cave in – because they are in a trap; can’t hold out. Second place, suppose you manage it. Solidarity. So solid not a tonne of grain is delivered to catapult head. Forget ice; it’s grain that makes Authority important and not just neutral agency it was set up to be. No grain. What happens?’ ‘Why [??035] have to negotiate a fair price, that’s what!’ ‘[??035], you and your comrades listen to each other too much. Authority would call it rebellion and warship would orbit with bombs earmarked for L-City and Hong Kong and Tycho Under and Churchill and Novylen, troops would land, grain barges would lift, under guard – and farmers would break necks to cooperate. Terra has guns and power and bombs and ships and won’t hold still for trouble from ex-cons. And troublemakers like you – and me; with you in spirit – us lousy troublemakers will be rounded up and eliminated, teach us a lesson. And earthworms would say we had it coming … because our side would never be heard. Not on Terra.’
LOCATION: 618

Wyoh looked stubborn. ‘Revolutions have succeeded before. Lenin had only a handful with him.’ ‘Lenin moved in on a power vacuum. Wye, correct me if wrong. Revolutions succeeded when – only when – governments had gone rotten soft, or disappeared.’
LOCATION: 629

A rational anarchist believes that concepts such as “state” and “society” and “government” have no existence save as physically exemplified in the acts of self-responsible individuals. He believes that it is impossible to shift blame, share blame, distribute blame … as blame, guilt, responsibility are matters taking place inside human beings singly and nowhere else. But being rational, he knows that not all individuals hold his evaluations, so he tries to live perfectly in an imperfect world … aware that his effort will be less than perfect yet undismayed by self-knowledge of self-failure.’
LOCATION: 1225

‘My point is that one person is responsible. Always. If H-bombs exist – and they do – some man controls them. In terms of morals there is no such thing as a “state.” Just men. Individuals. Each responsible for his own acts.’
LOCATION: 1233

Do this. Don’t do that. Stay back in line. Where’s tax receipt? Fill out form. Let’s see license. Submit six copies. Exit only. No left turn. No right turn. Queue up to pay fine. Take back and get stamped. Drop dead – but first get permit.
LOCATION: 1245

I am free, no matter what rules surround me. If I find them tolerable, I tolerate them; if I find them too obnoxious, I break them. I am free because I know that I alone am morally responsible for everything I do.’
LOCATION: 1252

Must be a yearning deep in human heart to stop other people from doing as they please. Rules, laws – always for other fellow. A murky part of us, something we had before we came down out of trees, and failed to shuck when we stood up. Because not one of those people said: ‘Please pass this so that I won’t be able to do something I know I should stop.’ Nyet, tovarisschee, was always something they hated to see neighbors doing. Stop them ‘for their own good’ – not because speaker claimed to be harmed by it.
LOCATION: 3154

But you do not get milk by beating the cow. Discussions of how to augment our shipments must be based on the facts of nature, not on the false assumption that we are slaves, bound by a work quota we never made. So which shall it be? Will you persist in believing that we are slaves, indentured to an Authority other than ourselves? Or will you acknowledge that we are free, negotiate with us, and learn how we can help you?’
LOCATION: 3683

He said, ‘Professor, have you any idea of the cost of shipping that much tonnage to the Moon?’ Prof waved it aside. ‘A technicality. Sir, there was a time when it was not simply expensive to ship goods across oceans but impossible. Then it was expensive, difficult, dangerous. Today you sell goods half around your planet almost as cheaply as next door; long-distance shipping is the least important factor in cost. Gentlemen, I am not an engineer. But I have learned this about engineers. When something must be done, engineers can find a way that is economically feasible. If you want the grain that we can grow, turn your engineers loose.’
LOCATION: 3760

‘First, what is it you want us to pay taxes for? Tell me what I get and perhaps I’ll buy it. No, put it this way. Do you pay taxes?’ ‘Certainly I do! And so should you.’ ‘And what do you get for your taxes?’ ‘Huh? Taxes pay for government.’ I said, ‘Excuse me, I’m ignorant. I’ve lived my whole life in Luna, I don’t know much about your government. Can you feed it to me in small pieces? What do you get for your money?’ They all got interested and anything this aggressive little choom missed, others supplied. I kept a list. When they stopped, I read it back: ‘Free hospitals – aren’t any in Luna. Medical insurance – we have that but apparently not what you mean by it. If a person wants insurance, he goes to a bookie and works out a bet. You can hedge anything, for a price. I don’t hedge my health, I’m healthy. Or was till I came here. We have a public library, one Carnegie Foundation started with a few book films. It gets along by charging fees. Public roads. I suppose that would be our tubes. But they are no more free than air is free. Sorry, you have free air here, don’t you? I mean our tubes were built by companies who put up money and are downright nasty about expecting it back and then some. Public schools. There are schools in all warrens and I never heard of them turning away pupils, so I guess they are “public.” But they pay well, too, because anyone in Luna who knows something useful and is willing to teach it, charges all the traffic will bear.’ I went on: ‘Let’s see what else— Social security. I’m not sure what that is but, whatever it is, we don’t have it. Pensions. You can buy a pension. Most people don’t; most families are large and old people, say a hundred and up, either fiddle along at something they like, or sit and watch video.
LOCATION: 3771

‘Sovereign,’ like ‘love,’ means anything you want it to mean; it’s a word in dictionary between ‘sober’ and ‘sozzled.’
LOCATION: 3950

‘Because it wasn’t in the news. A managed democracy is a wonderful thing, Manuel, for the managers … and its greatest strength is a “free press” when “free” is defined as “responsible” and the managers define what is “irresponsible.”
LOCATION: 4018

‘They arise, as marriage customs always do, from economic necessities of the circumstances – and our circumstances are very different from those here on Earth. Take the line type of marriage which my colleague has been praising … and justifiably, I assure you, despite his personal bias – I am a bachelor and have no bias. Line marriage is the strongest possible device for conserving capital and insuring the welfare of children – the two basic societal functions for marriage everywhere – in an environment in which there is no security, neither for capital nor for children, other than that devised by individuals. Somehow human beings always cope with their environments. Line marriage is a remarkably successful invention to that end. All other Lunar forms of marriage serve that same purpose, though not as well.’
LOCATION: 4106

Prof was undisturbed. Fitted fingertips together and looked relaxed. ‘Manuel, I don’t think the situation is as bad as you seem to feel that it is. In each age it is necessary to adapt to the popular mythology. At one time kings were anointed by Deity, so the problem was to see to it that Deity anointed the right candidate. In this age the myth is “the will of the people” … but the problem changes only superficially. Comrade Adam and I have had long discussions about how to determine the will of the people. I venture to suggest that this solution is one we can work with.’ ‘Well … okay. But why weren’t we told? Stu, did you know?’ ‘No, Mannie. There was no reason to tell me.’ He shrugged. ‘I’m a monarchist, I wouldn’t have been interested. But I go along with Prof that in this day and age elections are a necessary ritual.’
LOCATION: 4447

But you could work them out … and thereby avoid the chronic sickness of representative government, the disgruntled minority which feels – correctly! – that it has been disenfranchised.
LOCATION: 4723

‘I note one proposal to make this Congress a two-house body. Excellent – the more impediments to legislation the better. But, instead of following tradition, I suggest one house of legislators, another whose single duty is to repeal laws. Let the legislators pass laws only with a two-thirds majority … while the repealers are able to cancel any law through a mere one-third minority. Preposterous? Think about it. If a bill is so poor that it cannot command two-thirds of your consents, is it not likely that it would make a poor law? And if a law is disliked by as many as one-third is it not likely that you would be better off without it?
LOCATION: 4726

‘But in writing your constitution let me invite attention to the wonderful virtues of the negative! Accentuate the negative! Let your document be studded with things the government is forever forbidden to do. No conscript armies … no interference however slight with freedom of press, or speech, or travel, or assembly, or of religion, or of instruction, or communication, or occupation … no involuntary taxation. Comrades, if you were to spend five years in a study of history while thinking of more and more things that your government should promise never to do and then let your constitution be nothing but those negatives, I would not fear the outcome. ‘What I fear most are affirmative actions of sober and well-intentioned men, granting to government powers to do something that appears to need doing.
LOCATION: 4730

‘Goodness me, sir, that’s your problem. I can think of several ways. Voluntary contributions just as churches support themselves … government-sponsored lotteries to which no one need subscribe … or perhaps you Congressmen should dig down into your own pouches and pay for whatever is needed; that would be one way to keep government down in size to its indispensable functions whatever they may be. If indeed there are any. I would be satisfied to have the Golden Rule be the only law; I see no need for any other, nor for any method of enforcing it. But if you really believe that your neighbors must have laws for their own good, why shouldn’t you pay for it? Comrades, I beg you – do not resort to compulsory taxation. There is no worse tyranny than to force a man to pay for what he does not want merely because you think it would be good for him.’
LOCATION: 4740

‘You have put your finger on the dilemma of all government – and the reason I am an anarchist. The power to tax, once conceded, has no limits; it continues until it destroys.
LOCATION: 4751

It may not be possible to do away with government – sometimes I think that government is an inescapable disease of human beings. But it may be possible to keep it small and starved and inoffensive – and can you think of a better way than by requiring the governors themselves to pay the costs of their antisocial hobby?’
LOCATION: 4753

I said, ‘Hold it, Stu. You say you’re a royalist because you’re a democrat?’ ‘Of course. A king is the people’s only protection against tyranny … especially against the worst of all tyrants, themselves. Prof will be ideal for the job … because he does not want the job.
LOCATION: 4777

Besides that, our water shots killed millions of fish and many fishermen, as fishermen and other seafarers had not heeded warnings. Indian government seemed as furious over fish as fishermen – but principle of sacredness of all life did not apply to us; they wanted our heads.
LOCATION: 5480

I slid out, talked with Mike, made notes. Went back in; they were still arguing. Prof looked up as I sat down. ‘Field Marshal, you have not expressed your opinion.’ I said, ‘Prof, can’t we lay off that “field marshal” nonsense? Children are in bed, can afford to be honest.’
LOCATION: 5504

somewhere, back in my youth, heard Prof say, ‘Manuel, when faced with a problem you do not understand, do any part of it you do understand, then look at it again.’ He had been teaching me something he himself did not understand very well – something in maths – but had taught me something far more important, a basic principle.
LOCATION: 5681