Private Governance: Creating Order in Economic and Social Life
Edward Peter Stringham

The standard analysis is overly pessimistic about the ability of individuals and communities to find rules that enable them to live better together and to realize the social gains from cooperation rather than devolve into social conflict without the establishment of a coercive state authority. But the standard analysis is also overly optimistic about the state’s ability to establish binding constraints on itself so that societies are not just trading off the threat of private predation for public predation.
LOCATION: 65

In these markets the forces of reputation acted as an alternative to government enforcement.
LOCATION: 124

Mechanisms of private governance work in small and large groups, among friends and strangers, in ancient and modern societies, and for simple and extremely complex transactions. They often exist alongside, and in many cases in spite of, government legal efforts, and most of the time they are totally missed. The more that private governance solves problems behind the scenes, the more people overlook it and misattribute order to the state.
LOCATION: 181

Private governance is everywhere and responsible for creating order not just in basic markets but also in the world’s most sophisticated markets, including futures and advanced derivatives markets.
LOCATION: 187

According to Spinoza (1670, c. 20), “He who tries to determine everything by law, will foment crime rather than lessen it.”
LOCATION: 193

In this perspective order comes about privately, and attempting to legislate outcomes can have the opposite effect. Government is often dysfunctional and crowds out private sources of order, or it is simply absent or too costly to use.
LOCATION: 195

Yet the more seamless private governance is, the fewer people notice it or appreciate its beauty.
LOCATION: 207

Not only is the deus ex machina popular in poorly written fiction, it is also popular in bad social science. In many social science and policy debates theorists think of potential problems and assume government can solve them
LOCATION: 253

“The quintessential legal centralist was Thomas Hobbes, who thought that in a society without a sovereign, all would be chaos,” but he argues that such thinking strongly influences law and economics scholarship today: “The seminal works in law and economics hew to the Hobbesian tradition of legal centralism.”
LOCATION: 266

Just as the central planner assumes that without property rights, prices, profits, and markets the government can engage in rational economic calculation, the legal centralist assumes that government, a monopolist legal and regulatory system, can effectively weigh the effects of each rule to prevent problems in markets.
LOCATION: 401

Providers of private governance will never solve all problems, in the same way that entrepreneurs will never invent every possible product. But just as profit lures entrepreneurs to find ways to better serve customers, profits lure providers of private governance to find better ways of protecting property rights and facilitating exchange.
LOCATION: 454

Throughout history governments have had a tremendous track record of undermining property rights and interfering with markets, but even if one assumes that government is ultimately beneficent, one must recognize that government does not meet all needs, and that explains why people turn to private governance.
LOCATION: 471

Effective economic governance includes mechanisms such as credible commitments, reputation mechanisms, vertical integration, private protection of property rights, and profit-motivated contract enforcement (Williamson, 2005, pp. 14–15). The demand for order exists and is most often met by providers of private governance.
LOCATION: 520

The amount of private governance in current society is far greater than people commonly recognize and governance can be analyzed as a club good that can be provided in a multitude of ways.
LOCATION: 523

Clubs allow members to opt into preferred governance structures, and they create incentives for cooperation within. The simple ability to screen or exclude unwanted members gives clubs a powerful tool to discourage bad behavior without relying on the use of force. Competing clubs must constantly prevent or alleviate potential problems in ways that their members prefer. Private governance harnesses the benefits of competition, experimentation, and constant feedback that are seen in markets but not in government.
LOCATION: 527

Instead, Buchanan suggests that all goods can be analyzed as club goods for which the optimal size of the club depends on each good. In this framework the optimal size of a club to consume an ice cream cone is usually one person, and the optimal size of a club to use a lighthouse (in theory but not in actuality [Coase, 1974]) might be infinite, because a lighthouse is a pure “public good.”
LOCATION: 550

A rational approach does not think of potential problems and then assume that government can solve them (Demsetz, 1969). The question of externalities should include what the relevant alternatives are. Government as a coercive monopoly has many inherent problems of its own. Governance through clubs has practical and moral advantages over governance imposed by city, state, national, or global government.
LOCATION: 598

In contrast to a voluntary association, the state “arrogates to [itself] a compulsory monopoly of police or judicial protection” (Rothbard, 1977, p. 2), which makes people subjects whether they like it or not.3 The essence of markets is voluntary choice, whereas the essence of the state is imposing its choices on everyone.
LOCATION: 609

The idea that firms’ interests are never aligned with those of their business partners should be rejected outright (for whom, after all, are the producers producing?), but it should be recognized that at any given instant trading partners’ interests can diverge. Parties can agree to a contract that would be mutually beneficial if everything went according to the original plan, yet after initiating the contract one party might feel the desire to engage in postcontractual opportunism (Klein, Crawford, and Allen, 1978). Leeson (2007a) has criticized some of my work (Stringham, 2006) by saying that even if a proprietary community makes a set of promises, it will have an incentive to disregard its promises in the postcontractual period.
LOCATION: 639

This is not to imply that at any instant private governance (or any other system) has the ability to eliminate all problems, but consumers and providers of private governance do have incentives to find ways of minimizing the problems associated with opportunism. The more effective the solutions, the more they will be demanded by consumers. The same is true about the overall reliability and consumer focus of private governance.
LOCATION: 658

Such issues do pose potential problems, but sellers have an incentive to eliminate them by providing assurances to buyers (Klein, 2002; DiLorenzo, 2011). In the car market, for example, sellers rely on various mechanisms such as repeat business, reputation, money back guarantees, third-party verification, third-party warranties, and leases in which the lessor, as the owner of the car, bears the long-run risk of any problem. Sellers have an incentive to assure buyers that they will get their money’s worth.
LOCATION: 668

Similarly, providers of private governance have an incentive to provide assurances that they will treat their clients well; otherwise, the demand for their product will not be as high as it could be. A stock exchange that fails to provide assurances or attempts to stack the deck in favor of its members at the expense of investors will attract fewer investors in its market in the long run.
LOCATION: 675

“The fundamental principle for describing a free society is the principle of freedom of association. A first corollary of this principle is the freedom of disassociation.” A voluntary association requires the right to exclude nonmembers in much the same way that private property implies the right to exclude unwanted guests. Markets for apartments function only because apartment buildings can exclude nonrenters, the hotel market functions only because hotels can exclude nonpayers, and the restaurant market functions only because restaurants can exclude noncustomers. When government laws prevent owners from excluding nonpaying guests, the result is for many sellers or landlords to simply take their product off the market.
LOCATION: 702

With membership requirements and the ability to exclude the unreliable, one is less likely to face potential rule breakers in the first place, and once in the club the prospect of potential expulsion also creates incentives against misbehavior.
LOCATION: 745

Notice that membership requirements enable the enforcement of rules with minimal or often no use of force. When the New York Stock Exchange has the ability to suspend a member’s $4 million seat or an apartment building has the ability to change the locks and cash a renter’s $1,000 security deposit, it need not fret about any transgression less than $4 million or $1,000, respectively.
LOCATION: 747

Governance can be analyzed as a product just like other products that can be supplied and purchased voluntarily.10 Consider the producers in the markets for country clubs, colleges, stock exchanges, credit card networks, or any sort of private governance. All these producers have an incentive to cater to their clients or members, whether these are long or short term. Producers have incentives to innovate, to keep costs down, and to experiment to see what members want. In shareholder-owned clubs, owners that innovate to better serve members earn profits, and member-owned clubs that innovate bestow benefits directly to their members, so in both cases the incentive is to serve members.
LOCATION: 784

I agree with Ellickson (1991) and Williamson (1996) that most people put far too much emphasis on legal rules as the source of order, but even if one assumes that certain problems require legal rules, one need not assume that a compulsory monopoly must provide them. Historically, many legal systems have not involved a government monopoly (Benson, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1994a, 1998; Stringham and Curott, 2010; Stringham and Zywicki, 2011b) and are much more concerned with the parties in the dispute than with advancing the interests of the state
LOCATION: 820

Much of what legal centralists consider legal problems might better be thought of as risk management problems.
LOCATION: 832

I think that the assumption that the state creates the framework for markets is an unrealistic view of the state,12 but one can believe that while still allowing for a very large percentage of governance to be private. Private governance is already quite pervasive, and it easily could be expanded to more areas.
LOCATION: 844

agree with Benson (1994a) and Holcombe (2004) that the state and its law enforcement apparatus were created not to provide public goods or enhance markets but instead as a means of extracting revenue for those in control of the state.
LOCATION: 892

From relatively simple markets such as eBay to complex markets such as that for (the often unfairly maligned) credit default swaps, private sector innovators are usually years ahead of government officials. In a world where government officials think they can prevent stock market declines by outlawing short sales (whether the prohibition comes in 1610 or 2010—after four hundred years government officials are just as oblivious to how markets work), the private sector cannot rely on government to advance markets.
LOCATION: 922

The idea that government is in the background to assist and advance markets is a heroic assumption made by most economists, including those who are otherwise skeptical about government
LOCATION: 926

In general, treating others how they treat you or adopting norms of reciprocity can eliminate cheating (
LOCATION: 941

In the history of the world’s first stock markets, parties extended the discipline of continuous dealings through reputation mechanisms among large numbers and with complicated contracts. With a bilateral reputation mechanism, when one party cheats, the other party boycotts him in the future. But with a multilateral reputation mechanism, when one party cheats, all other parties boycott him in the future. The governance is private and completely informal. Even if two parties have never interacted before and have no intention of interacting again, both will think twice about damaging their valuable reputation for a short-run gain
LOCATION: 955

At the most basic level, many prisoners’ dilemmas can be avoided when people can communicate, choose their trading partners, and deal with each other on a regular basis
LOCATION: 1194

Of all the nations in Europe, the Dutch, the most commercial, are the most faithful to their word…. This is not at all to be imputed to national character, as some pretend…. It is far more reduceable to self interest, that general principle which regulates the actions of every man, and which leads men to act in a certain manner from views of advantage, and is as deeply implanted in an Englishman as a Dutchman. A dealer is afraid of losing his character, and is scrupulous in observing every engagement. When a person makes 20 contracts in a day, he cannot gain so much by endeavouring to impose on his neighbours, as the very appearance of a cheat would make him lose.
LOCATION: 1198

The word credit comes from the Latin credere, which actually means to “believe or trust,” implying that people must assess someone’s trustworthiness before making a transaction. Credit does not imply that transactions require third-party enforcement.
LOCATION: 1208

The many traders on the Bourse did not have close familial or religious ties (Stringham, 2003, p. 335), but they extended the discipline of continuous dealings through a multilateral reputation mechanism (Greif, 1989, 1993; Clay, 1997a, p. 511). With their multilateral reputation mechanism the cost of cheating became the souring of a relationship not only with the victim but with everyone else who found out.
LOCATION: 1217

Putting one’s reputation on the line with each transaction is like posting a bond for each trade (Bernstein, 1996). When the value of the bond exceeds what could be had from cheating, the “need” to rely on third-party enforcement or threat of punishment is eliminated.
LOCATION: 1241

Take a minute to think about the percentage of interaction and dealings in your life that could be reasonably adjudicated by third parties. It would be extremely costly if to bring each of these interactions to court, not to mention what that would do to one’s business and personal relationships over the long run.11 Most people find it more cost effective to rely on reputation mechanisms rather than on courts (even private ones).
LOCATION: 1261

A borrower who defaults may gain in the short run, but lenders use a multilateral reputation mechanism to share information that then influences the defaulter’s credit rating. An ideal loan has the risk of default properly priced into the interest rate, and although some borrowers default, most do not.
LOCATION: 1281

Underwriters Laboratories and THX Limited, for example, put their stamp of approval on electrical appliances and stereo equipment, respectively, so that consumers can rely on the reputation of those firms rather than investigate each individual producer. Alternatively, parties can contract with a bonding agency that vouches for someone and assumes any risk if that party does not deliver on his promises.
LOCATION: 1289

Brokers experimented with ways to notify each other about defaulters, fines, entrance fees, subscription fees, and membership requirements. Their ultimate enforcement mechanism ended up being exclusion of anyone who did not meet certain requirements or follow the rules.
LOCATION: 1369

Transforming coffeehouses into an exclusive club eliminated what could have been a tragedy of the commons situation in which cheating undermined the market. The exclusive club both reduced the admission of unreliable people and created incentives for cooperation of members. Exclusive membership served as a forfeitable bond and made unenforceability in courts of law irrelevant. The history of the London Stock Exchange shows that “the rules of the game” for the most sophisticated markets evolved endogenously from the market rather than from government.
LOCATION: 1380

Although the subcommittee said some disputes could be settled within the Exchange using “the known Laws of the Land,” it added that “many others (which, from their nature and extent, preclude the possibility of forming any general laws on the subject, so as to meet every contingency) may also be adjusted by the known custom and practice of the market” (p. 10). Government was not the chicken that laid the egg of stock markets. Instead, both the market and rules governing the stock market evolved privately.
LOCATION: 1541

The Exchange also had rules about consequences for defaulters. All creditors whose counterparty defaulted were required to report the default to the Committee for General Purposes. Any creditor who violated the rule had his name “affixed in a conscious part of the Stock-Exchange” (pp. 34–35). Other rules outlined the equivalent of bankruptcy proceedings. If someone in default was scheduled to be paid money from another set of trades, the proceeds were split proportionally among the creditors of the defaulter. This prevented a strategic defaulter from reneging on some contracts but collecting on others.
LOCATION: 1597

But the Exchange only had a “monopoly” if one defines the relevant market as “conducting trade within the Exchange.” Because nonmembers could trade in private offices, the Royal Exchange, the Bank of England, other regional exchanges, or foreign exchanges (Mortimer, 1801; Kregel, 1995; Morgan and Thomas, [1962] 1969; Michie, 1985; Neal, 1987; Stringham, 2002), the market in London is best analyzed as a contestable market under the constant threat of competition.
LOCATION: 1627

We can generalize this argument. Today even though government regulations make markets much less competitive than they otherwise would be, the London Stock Exchange, the New York Stock Exchange, NASDAQ, and every other exchange must woo customers by having rules and regulations that add value to the market.
LOCATION: 1636

The stock exchange as a rule-enforcing club is representative of a much wider phenomenon. In each area of one’s life, people face different challenges, and in some areas people desire formal rules. A chess club, a sports league, or any firm can create any rules it wants, the costs and benefits of which are borne by the people inside that organization. The London Stock Exchange shows that the rules of one of the most important and sophisticated markets, the stock market, were generated privately rather than from the state.
LOCATION: 1639

In fact, the first transparency, listing, and disclosure requirements all predated the Securities and Exchange Commission in America and the precursor to the Financial Conduct Authority in England. When the Securities Act and the Securities Exchange Act were implemented in 1933 and 1934, they simply mandated many of the requirements that the New York Stock Exchange had already adopted.
LOCATION: 1721

It must be recognized at the outset that no stock market, however regulated, can ever be 100 percent free of listed firms going broke (nor should it be—that is how markets work). The whole point of stock markets is that they allow investors to become partial owners in firms, creating the potential for both higher risks and higher returns.
LOCATION: 1984

Why have failure and fraud not run rampant, as the “race to the bottom” theorists would have predicted? Even though Nomads are hired by the firms that they regulate, both the London Stock Exchange and investors must approve these regulators. The London Stock Exchange is the first gatekeeper, as it can expel a Nomad for improperly fulfilling its role. The second gatekeepers are the investors, many of whom are institutional and have repeated experience with the Nomads. If a Nomad establishes a reputation among listing firms for laxity in its regulatory duties (the race to the bottom), that reputation can be easily transmitted to investors. Although investors may find it difficult to fully investigate each of the thousand-plus firms listing shares, they can more easily see if a Nomad is consistently peddling fraudulent firms.
LOCATION: 1998

If anything, the fact that only four known major instances of fraud have occurred among the more than 3,200 firms that have traded in the history of AIM indicates that AIM has been extremely successful in keeping fraud to a minimum. John Pierce, CEO of the Quoted Companies Alliance, notes that for every fraudulent company “there are hundreds of AIM success stories with upstanding management teams working earnestly in the interests of shareholders” (quoted in Taylor, 2009). The ratio is 1 to 800, to be precise. The cases of fraud are quite contained and have not cascaded as the “Regulatory competition leads to a race to the bottom” theorists would have predicted.
LOCATION: 2029

Providers of private governance have done an extraordinarily good job at putting a stamp of approval on legitimate firms and not putting a stamp of approval on bad ones. If investors, the customers of private governance, want to do business in the safest settings, they can do business with firms at New York Stock Exchange, or if investors want to opt out of those rules and trade elsewhere, they can.
LOCATION: 2052

Providers of private governance must remain faithful servants and have entirely different sets of knowledge and incentives than government bureaucrats. The more that providers of private governance make their markets transparent and prevent customers from being defrauded, the more that providers and customers of private governance gain.
LOCATION: 2055

North and others are correct that fraud is potentially profitable and that the traditional discipline of repeated dealings offers little constraint in certain contexts. The only problem with North’s theory is that those exact conditions (large groups, technological sophistication, degrees of anonymity, and interaction across political boundaries) also make government enforcement more difficult or impossible. As transactions become anonymous, not only are private parties unaware who is swindling them but so too is government. And even if a government can track down a fraudster, it may have limited ability to recover assets. Suing a fraudster from Nigeria is not easy. To the swindled, government solutions are often too little, too late. Government can have as many rules against fraud as it wants, but as its ability to enforce them decreases, the situation is not much different from fraud being legal.
LOCATION: 2084

The assumption that technologically advanced markets depend on government seems wildly unrealistic.
LOCATION: 2128

Losing money because of a fraudulent order is not a good thing, but neither is turning down all orders with a miniscule probability of fraud. PayPal had an incentive to deal with risks in a reasonable way, in contrast to government officials who lack feedback about whether they are being too lax or too zealous.
LOCATION: 2197

PayPal solved an important problem, and it was rewarded. Before PayPal began in late 1999, more than 90 percent of eBay auctions were paid using checks (Schwartz, 2001). Only half a year later, more than 1 million daily auctions on eBay were advertising PayPal as a method of payment. Purchased by eBay for $1.5 billion in 2002, PayPal now has 109.8 million accounts and processes more than $118 billion in transactions per year (Sengupta, 2012). The company’s fraud loss rate is an industry-leading 0.5 percent (PayPal, 2012).
LOCATION: 2204

What legal centralists consider enforcement problems are treated by the private sector as risk management problems.
LOCATION: 2252

But herein lies the beauty of the market. Even if laws against fraud are ineffective and the possibility of recovering assets from fraudsters is zero, transactions can still take place among even the most risk-averse traders when transacting parties can hire intermediaries to pool and insure risks, thus pricing them into the cost of a transaction.7 All of this transforms the risk of fraud into a predictable cost of doing business, and it enables parties with various risk profiles to smoothly transact. For example, even if 10 percent of total sales in a particular area go bad, payment processors assuming the cost of fraud will still process them if they can charge transaction fees that are ten percentage points higher.8 Those transacting in higher-risk areas can use the aptly named high-risk payment processors (some charge merchants upward of 15 percent per transaction), just as more risky borrowers can borrow money by paying higher interest rates.
LOCATION: 2271

Here payment processors and other financial intermediaries provide their important behind-the-scenes role. Intermediaries make money by facilitating transactions, and any company that can ceteris paribus lower transaction costs, including lower costs of fraud, will gain. This makes the intermediaries beneficiaries of successful fraud management, and the better they are at keeping fraudsters out, the lower the risk premiums they will have to charge. In the constant game of cat and mouse, firms that find better ways of keeping fraudsters at bay are able to provide a better (a lower-cost) service to their customers.
LOCATION: 2286

Despite the widely held theory that policing is nonexcludable and impossible to charge for (Landsburg, 2010, p. 467; Lipsey and Chrystal, 2007, p. 278), policing is often bundled with real estate, where access is excludable and the bundle is priced as a single entity.1 Whether the “public” good is unarmed security or full-fledged private police, the principles are the same. A shopping center does not charge separately for its security guards—or fountains, sidewalks, and streetlights—and instead prices these collective goods into merchant rents, which are ultimately priced into consumer products.
LOCATION: 2388

A shopping center does not need to negotiate with each customer for each of these separate amenities and eliminates free riding by indirectly charging all customers for these collective goods.
LOCATION: 2393

I am sure some people will think, “It is unfair that paying customers receive service and people without money to spare for the service do not.” Do not forget that for issues that government considers unimportant, nobody receives responses.
LOCATION: 2522

Economists can develop as many theories as they want about how police are public goods that only government has an incentive to provide (Lipsey and Chrystal, 2007, p. 278), but those theories fly in the face of reality. In contrast to government police, the customers state that the private firm “monitors and polices all of my locations in both plain clothes and uniform,”
LOCATION: 2587

The idea that government police primarily care about the well-being of public and that private parties do not is an assumption that should be questioned.
LOCATION: 2656

Theories that policing cannot be privately financed notwithstanding, markets allow financing of private police through arrangements such as bundling. Police in these arrangements must cater to customers’ needs and keep them safe. As Stenning (2000, p. 93) concludes, “It is now almost impossible to identify any function or responsibility of the public police which is not, somewhere and under some circumstances, assumed and performed by private police.” Private police are not everywhere, but they do, and are capable of doing, much more than the typical person knows.
LOCATION: 2719

Internal moral constraints are rules that people choose to follow even if other people do not impose them; these constraints are chosen from within. Manners, politeness, honesty, and trustworthiness are common examples of internal constraints that people commonly adopt independent of external rules.
LOCATION: 2823

When corporations or clubs organize among members with similar internal moral constraints (and disassociate with people who have different sets of internal moral constraints), they internalize many of the benefits of individual self-governance and lower the cost of enforcement.
LOCATION: 2834

But in Theory of Moral Sentiments, Smith describes reasons why individuals adopt constraints and govern themselves. Smith ([1759] 1853, p. 235) believes that if we do something that our moral faculties judge as wrong, “Those vicegerents of God within us, never fail to punish the violation of them, by the torments of inward shame, and self-condemnation; and on the contrary, always reward obedience with tranquility of mind, with contentment, and self-satisfaction.” Smith considers these constraints as internal; the only punishments are shame or self-condemnation. The person with a conscience does not want to have to think about the questions “How can you live with yourself?” and “How can you sleep at night?”
LOCATION: 2864

Many historical and modern case studies show that societies can function even when external constraints are largely absent. The examples are not proof but are consistent with the hypothesis that internal moral constraints are important. For example, the rural California cattlemen and ranchers interviewed by Ellickson (1991) resolve disputes without any knowledge of or regard for formal law; they instead rely on norms such as the desire to be a good neighbor.
LOCATION: 2896

Research in experimental economics shows people regularly cooperating without external constraints. Smith (2008, p. 250) provides a comprehensive summary of the findings in experimental economics and describes how cooperation is common even “in games without a punishment option.” Smith (1998, p. 11) writes that even with anonymous interaction, “the data strongly reject the game theoretic hypotheses that in a single interactive play of the game subjects will overwhelmingly play noncooperatively.” McCloskey (2006, p. 498) writes, “The life of man is solitary and poor unless the Max U’s cooperate—as in fact experimental subjects do cooperate, because they have been children and have loved someone and are not monsters.”
LOCATION: 2911

Regardless of where they were from, people were much less likely to behave opportunistically than orthodox neoclassical theory predicts. But, as one would expect, some people cooperated more than others. One of the researchers’ most interesting findings is that “the higher the degree of market integration” in a society, “the greater the level of prosociality expressed in experimental games” (2005, p. 795).10 This is consistent with McCloskey’s (2006) view that markets make people more moral or perhaps that fence sitters find it easier to act morally in a market economy. The causality may go the other way, but markets and morality seem to go hand in hand (Storr, 2009; Langrill and Storr, 2012).
LOCATION: 2934

The experimental economics literature on this topic is vast and growing, as it should be. These academic studies confirm an important point that most people (except a few economists and paranoiacs) already know: not everyone is out to get everyone else. Of course, exceptions exist, and certain people are more likely to lack or to be tempted to violate internal moral rules. But this fact actually helps prove the point about the relative importance of internal and external constraints.
LOCATION: 2940

“A community that contains a larger number of members who exhibit a sense of fair play, mutual respect, and reciprocal understanding has less need of formal laws, and can avoid many of the social costs of enforcement by comparison with a community with a larger share of ‘natural criminals.’”
LOCATION: 2955

Many bankers refer to the “four Cs of credit” when deciding to extend a loan: collateral, capital, capacity, and character.
LOCATION: 2967

Public streets and private venues where government mandates open access are more likely to face a tragedy-of-the-commons problem than voluntary associations where people deal with others who share similar moral views.
LOCATION: 2989

Psychological research indicates that adult psychopaths and children who have yet to be socialized are more likely to believe in the necessity of external controls. Responsible people, in contrast, realize that they must constrain their own choices.
LOCATION: 3004

In his analysis of Smith’s Theory of Moral Sentiments, Otteson (2002) maintains that children gradually learn what is right and wrong by observing how people react to their actions. An infant has less ability to understand how others react to their actions, but as children grow up, they understand better. Otteson (2002, p. 108) writes that children favor positive feedback and disfavor reprimands, so they “first see the need to discipline themselves when they have contact with others.” Over time children become better at anticipating how others will react, and they learn how to internalize rules of proper behavior.
LOCATION: 3007

In addition to feedback from parents or teachers, positive feedback about adoption of internal constraints may come from social norms in greater society. Norms are informal rules or customs that usually involve disapproval or extralegal sanctions if violated, so they entail a degree of constraint external to the individual. As one constantly receives feedback for acting in a certain way, one might internalize adherence to certain norms and follow them even when one does not face any repercussions.
LOCATION: 3012

Adam Smith was not just a simple economist but also a moral philosopher who taught about the beneficence of markets. Maybe we should be teaching people about the importance of respecting other people’s property rights and the importance of following through on one’s contracts. Increasing respect for property rights and abiding by one’s contracts may not eliminate the need for other forms of governance, but they may reduce how much need we have for them.
LOCATION: 3052

Individual self-governance is one of the most important sources of governance. Yet out of all areas of governance, individual self-governance is the least studied and recognized. Those who pay attention to this important source of governance, rather than ignoring it as unscientific from a positive perspective or unrealistic from a normative perspective, have a better understanding of why cooperation occurs and ways in which it might be improved.
LOCATION: 3056

“Individuals in higher-trust societies spend less to protect themselves from being exploited in economic transactions. Written contracts are less likely to be needed, and they do not have to specify every possible contingency. Litigation may be less frequent. Individuals in high-trust societies are also likely to divert fewer resources to protecting themselves.”
LOCATION: 3118

Third-party adjudication is not the “necessity” that legal centralists assume (scores of markets without external enforcement would not exist otherwise), but it can help minimize the problem of potential conflict or provide extra assurances. And as with the other examples of private governance, the greater the potential need, the more likely private parties are to arrange for it. Far from being libertarian fantasy, competing courts in England are analyzed by Adam Smith, who comments that competition led to “superior dispatch and impartiality.”
LOCATION: 3153

Rather than putting these decisions in the hands of legislators or courts of law, eBay transforms what could have been legal questions into business questions in which the objective is to serve buyers and sellers who use the service. Although certain actions may be right or wrong from a deontological point of view, the best way to resolve eBay disputes is not given from on high.
LOCATION: 3191

With the exception of the litigious parties whose goal is to use the legal system to extract resources from others (Haymond, 2001), trading partners typically do not want to have large sums of money tied up in legal proceedings or have lots of resources wasted in protracted disputes. Sussman and Wilkinson (2012, pp. 2–3) report that the “median length of time from filing through trial of civil cases in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York was 33.2 months,” and the median length of time “from filing a civil case in a lower court to disposition of appeal by the Second Superior Court of Appeals was 40.8 months.” In contrast, the median period of American Arbitration Association arbitration is less than eight months from start to finish, and more informal forms of alternative dispute resolution take much less time.
LOCATION: 3197

Whether we are talking about potential disputes between stockbrokers and clients, banks and customers, cell phone carriers and users, or landlords and tenants, attempting to stack the deck against one side does not pay when that party can adjust his willingness to enter an agreement. The cost of biased rules or procedures is borne by the party that the rules were intended to bias.
LOCATION: 3325

For example, Sordin (2004) tells the story of two sisters bickering over an orange. Their legalistic mother comes in, cuts the orange in half, and tells each to go on her way. The first takes her rind to make zest for a cake while discarding the inside, and the second eats the inside of her half while discarding the rind. Each sister could have had more had the adjudicator simply assessed their wants. Such a problem is clearly evident in government courts where judges and lawyers have little incentive to look into what the people want, and many thrive on protracted and costly disputes.9 Private adjudicators, in contrast, do not have unwilling customers and therefore must consider the well-being of their customers.
LOCATION: 3350

Even in countries like the United States, relying on government to enforce arbitral awards is at a minimum costly, so private parties will avoid it whenever possible. Consider some of the options they have discovered. When eBay’s arbitrator issued the $50 award for my paisley tie, he did not say, “Here is the judgment; now all you need to do is get the decision enforced in government court.” Instead, eBay tied the arbitration procedure to our existing eBay accounts and simply transferred the funds from the delinquent seller to me.
LOCATION: 3411

One potentially important explanation of why private parties want government to recognize their arbitration agreements is so they will not have their arbitral agreement overturned and not be dragged through government courts. This perspective presents government courts as a negative to be avoided rather than a positive that help make markets work. Private adjudication is not the solution to all the world’s problems, and in many or most cases, parties do not even need it. But whenever both parties agree to it, at the margin it should be viewed as unambiguously positive. When parties recognize that they need a third party to adjudicate a dispute, they can easily hire a third party to do so. Alternative dispute resolution lets parties opt out of highly imperfect government courts and opt into courts of their choosing.
LOCATION: 3468

In recent years, however, the scope of lending has expanded dramatically thanks to a new class of financial arrangements created with the recognition that courts are not a reliable way of getting back money from delinquent borrowers. Mortgage-backed securities, collateralized debt obligations, credit default swaps, and many other private arrangements (these are described in sections 11.2, 11.3, and 11.4) create new and tremendously complex forms of property rights and have done so largely outside the oversight of government regulators. They help price the risk of default into initial transactions and let some pay others to assume those risks.
LOCATION: 3529

These “lack of regulation caused catastrophe” and “regulation will prevent it next time” narratives are widely held, but they are actually centuries old. Since time immemorial the relative prices of assets have fluctuated, sometimes dramatically, but after major price declines one almost always sees a call for bans on certain advanced contracts. This was evident in Holland after the first major price decline in shares of the Dutch East India Company 1609, in England after the South Sea Bubble in 1720, and in America after the stock market crash in 1929.
LOCATION: 3558

The advanced arrangements that people blame for causing the financial crisis actually helped prevent matters from getting worse. Those who opted for aggressive investment vehicles and chose not to pay for more private governance were exposed to more risk, and those who opted for more conservative investment vehicles and chose to pay for more layers of protection limited their downside. Many criticisms of Wall Street are more sophisticated, but most stem from a fundamental misunderstanding of what financial products and private regulation were designed to do.
LOCATION: 3569

Private governance deals with certain types of risk, but it was not designed to guarantee success, and one should not be surprised if certain investment vehicles, such as intentionally riskier collateralized debt obligations, do not succeed. Many investors thought housing investments would be better than they turned out to be, but their overly bullish views were their problem and not a problem with Wall Street itself. Markets were never designed to guarantee success or stable relative prices.
LOCATION: 3578

Furthermore, even if a particular firm in the lock or security industry is not living up to its promises, this does not indicate that the lock or security industry is a failure. Competition does not guarantee that every firm serves its customers in the best possible way, but competition overall creates pressures to weed out bad firms and to provide better customer service over the long run.
LOCATION: 3606

The fact that some entities will fail is not a necessarily bad thing and is a reason for having competition in the first place. Government, in contrast, implements rules and regulations with little feedback about the cost or efficacy of those rules. This does not stop government from offering false promises, justifying more regulations, and then blaming the free market the next time problems occur.
LOCATION: 3609

During the 2008 economic downturn the advanced contracts that many people point to as causing the financial crisis were simply reacting, as they should, to changes in economic variables. Symptoms are not causal factors. Although they are usually maligned, collateralized debt obligations, credit default swaps, and other advanced financial arrangements help parties manage risk. Even in a world in which the legal system offers limited protection to lenders, these advanced markets help expand the amount of capital available to borrowers. They should be considered among the greatest innovations in history. These markets are highly complex, not the design of government, and are made possible because of private governance.
LOCATION: 3612

Mortgage-backed securities are a type of asset-backed security, and investors value them based on the types of loans, borrowers’ credit, loan-to-value ratio, loan-to-income ratio, type of property, income stream, or anything else that the investor deems important.
LOCATION: 3622

Nobody can predict the future with perfect accuracy, but the better that parties estimate the probability that borrowers will repay, the more accurately the default rates are priced into the interest rate. Asset-backed securities comprised of more reliable loans (such as thirty-year fixed interest rate mortgages from borrowers with high income and high credit) are less risky but will have a lower interest rate than riskier ones comprised of subprime loans.
LOCATION: 3624

More advanced collateralized debt obligations can be created by pooling and slicing any combination of collateralized debt obligations or other derivatives (i.e., collateralized debt obligations squared and synthetic collateralized debt obligations). These products became attractive because they enabled investing in mortgages without requiring investors to assume risks not of their liking or hold onto loans for thirty years. It also gave those willing to assume more risk the potential for, but not the guarantee of, higher returns.
LOCATION: 3637

These products allow parties to assume different types of risk, but they were never meant to eliminate all risk. If the profitability of the underlying assets changes, the value of the derivatives associated with those underlying assets will change. Between 2006 and 2008 the housing and mortgage markets worsened, and, as per the design of the securities, the investors that had been paid to assume more risks ended up actually assuming them. Unfortunately for them, many of the riskiest tranches saw their income stream and value of their tranche fall to zero.
LOCATION: 3649

The fact that certain home prices, mortgage-backed securities, or collateralized debt obligations fell in value is nothing to cheer about and many were negatively affected. But such relative price declines are not that different from when a particular stock or a class of stocks fall in value, especially when investors in riskier securities agreed to assume the first losses in the event of problems.
LOCATION: 3658

Although everyone would love an investment vehicle with all of the upside potential and none of the downside potential of stocks, that is not an option. The market requires firms and investors to test different investment strategies, just as it requires firms to experiment and test different ideas about consumer wants. Companies that develop products that best serve consumers get positive feedback through profits, whereas others get negative feedback through losses, and the same is true of investors who channel resources to more or less valuable investment opportunities.
LOCATION: 3660

Although many loans underlying the mortgage-backed securities and collateralized debt obligations did not end up performing as well many hoped, the mortgage-backed securities and collateralized debt obligations functioned pretty much as designed.
LOCATION: 3669

The value of mortgage-backed securities fell during the economic downturn, but because most underlying mortgages continue to pay, they have actually performed quite well in the long run.
LOCATION: 3681

While a $10,000 investment in high-yield municipal bonds would have increased to $14,334 during this time, a $10,000 investment in mortgage-backed securities would have increased to between $15,964 and $16,540 depending on the fund chosen.
LOCATION: 3684

The fact that in the aftermath of a major economic downturn only approximately 10 percent of Goldman Sachs–underwritten collateralized debt obligations assets ended up in default might indicate that Goldman Sachs was being overly conservative with their underwriting standards. Nobody claims market failure if 50 percent of new restaurants fail or 75 percent of Silicon Valley start-ups fail. Wall Street firms and investors that sought out riskier housing securities had the potential to gain or lose more, and everyone knew that.
LOCATION: 3698

Those that demanded riskier products ended up paying the price when economic outcomes did not go as planned. Such “failures” are not really failures; they simply exist because not everyone can predict the future. Just as big-wave surfers cannot expect to get in the ocean and see only the upside of waves, investors who choose riskier securities cannot expect only upside gains.
LOCATION: 3718

Rather than looking at poor performance during a downturn and concluding these markets are a failure, we should take a step back and appreciate what they have done in the long run. Not only has their long-run performance been fine, mortgage-backed securities and collateralized debt obligations have done for borrowers what stock markets did for companies. These markets have dramatically increased the amount of available capital and the ability for borrowers to get loans. No longer does one need to be royalty or have a close connection at the bank to access capital. These markets have also allowed everyone from the most conservative to the most risk tolerant to invest in loans. Wall Street created these great products in a legal environment that offers few protections or is often hostile to lenders.
LOCATION: 3721

Built into the price of each credit default swap is the recognition that “the protection buyer gives up the risk of default by the reference entity, and takes on the risk of simultaneous default by both the protection seller and the reference credit”
LOCATION: 3803

Because we live outside the Garden of Eden, we should not expect a world without problems due to unforeseen events, bad business decisions, or bad risk management. Yet today’s imperfections and mistakes are signals for tomorrow’s innovations.
LOCATION: 3822

The first point to highlight is the fact the Securities and Exchange Commission had a $1 billion annual budget and conducted eight investigations of Madoff over the years, yet it “failed to follow incriminating evidence in plain sight”
LOCATION: 3850

A reliable assumption is that most government officials lack an understanding of financial markets in general, and reading the full 450-page report from the inspector general of the Securities and Exchange Commission confirms it in this case. The first lesson is that government simply lacked the knowledge or incentive to notice this massive Ponzi scheme.
LOCATION: 3869

Even though the hedge fund and private equity industries lack most disclosure requirements, investors demand them, and third-party administrators and custodians can provide disclosure. Third-party administrators not only provide information about activity in a fund but also create various checks to prevent parties from misusing investor assets.
LOCATION: 3896

Will third-party administrators and custodians eliminate all potential problems? Of course not. The potential for fraud will always exist, but like locks on houses, or security guards at a bank, third-party administrators make fraud more difficult. Failing to pay for locks or for various levels of protection may be a failure of good judgment, but it is not a failure of private governance.
LOCATION: 3919

Despite what legal centralist theory might imply, paying for locks and paying for private governance are much more prudent than relying on ineffective government regulators or courts. In the wake of the Madoff scandal, third-party administrators and custodians should be celebrated as unheralded protectors of property rights and creators of transparency in the hedge fund industry.
LOCATION: 3921

When I buy a car or a home I willingly pay a third-party mechanic or an inspector to evaluate what I am buying, but when others choose not to, it should not be considered a failure of the inspection market. When a group of investors chooses not to pay for third-party accounting or certification services and the investors subsequently end up with less than they hoped, it should not be considered a failure of private governance.
LOCATION: 3933

Madoff’s $13 billion shortfall also pales in comparison to the $20 trillion by which Social “Security” is underfunded (Kotlikoff, 2012). I have no respect for Madoff, but he at least had decency to trick investors into his fraudulent scheme, rather than force investors to hand over their money or force workers to “invest” 12.4 percent of all earnings in a retirement scheme. After he was exposed, he also at least had the decency to admit he was a fraud rather than continue to tell people he is investing in their future. In contrast to government, private governance lets people hire others to do due diligence, pay for various levels of production, and opt into structures of governance that they prefer.
LOCATION: 3942

In 2008 many problems manifested in financial markets, but just because problems with underlying variables exist does mean not a lack regulation caused those problems or that private governance failed. Those who chose to invest in the safest investment vehicles and purchase more levels of private governance were exposed to fewer problems than those who willingly assumed more risk. Most parties that bought safer tranches, credit default swaps, and third-party accounting services turned out fine. The complex financial arrangements were developed independent of government and helped markets weather a storm that could have been much worse.
LOCATION: 3950

Based on the reaction to the 2008 and all past crises, we can be certain about two things moving forward: (1) No matter how many regulations are in place or how much the government did to cause the crisis, government will blame the next economic downturn on the free market and a lack of regulation, and (2) government will implement a set of new regulations that will be more onerous and do nothing to prevent the next economic downturn, leading back to point 1.
LOCATION: 3970

I have spoken with countless people on Wall Street, and the general sentiment is that government officials who write and implement regulations typically have little understanding of how financial markets actually work.
LOCATION: 3973

“The derivative genie got out of the bottle, and it’s a huge genie, and it will never get back into the bottle,” but rather than viewing this market innovation as a bad thing, we should be celebrating it. Even though government courts are highly imperfect, collateralized debt obligations, credit default swaps, and other advanced financial arrangements have opened up debt markets well beyond those that depend on close-knit ties. These markets are among the most complex the world has ever seen, and private governance makes them possible.
LOCATION: 3978

Enter government. Having a reputable third party certify that a piece is legitimate is good for a seller. A seller’s finding out that his wares are bogus is not. Unfortunately in the art market, a new norm for people who receive a negative assessment is to sue in government courts. The cases often have little merit and have been described by the Supreme Court of Montana as “legal thuggery” (see Seltzer v. Morton, Bison, Dunn, & Crutcher, LLP, 2007) but they are costly to defend. According to one art lawyer, “This is a very serious problem. Specialists are often academics earning $100,000 [or less] a year and they can’t afford litigation. [Specialists] are fearful of being a defendant in a lawsuit, even if they should win” (quoted in Adam and Pryor, 2011). Some choose to settle and pay damages rather than being dragged through court.
LOCATION: 4044

The result of this government “help” in the market is that now the Lichtenstein Foundation, Warhol Foundation, and many others have completely ceased authenticating art for fear of being sued.
LOCATION: 4054

In markets such as art certification, however, the good governance preceded government and is now being undermined by government. Government intervention can undermine markets for private governance in many ways: government can put roadblocks in front of, crowd out, monopolize, or co-opt private governance.
LOCATION: 4062

From the stocks markets in Amsterdam, London, and New York to arbitrators, colleges, and financial intermediaries today, almost all of the providers of private governance in this book still exist in some form. But almost all of them have faced various challenges from government and are often much less effective than they would be without government. In financial sector, many regulations have crowded out private regulation and interfered with private regulatory competition. In other areas such as policing in San Francisco, government has taken perfectly functioning markets of private governance and monopolized them for the sake of expanding government. Government found it could make money by requiring the public to pay for its “services” rather than letting people opt for private governance.
LOCATION: 4067

Other times, for example with colleges or financial intermediaries, government allows providers of private governance to persist but makes them put the government’s interests over that of consumers. The providers of private governance may not like it, but they often have little choice and become victims of cronyism. Although government may be a benign force that augments markets, it seems more accurate to view regulators as interfering with markets.
LOCATION: 4072

Private governance always functions to varying degrees, but it functions much less effectively the more it is hobbled by government.
LOCATION: 4075

Just because having one rule or regulation on a topic makes sense does not mean that having a million will. In a desire to attract business, each provider of private governance must compare the marginal benefits and marginal costs of new rules and then adopt only those whose marginal benefits exceed marginal costs
LOCATION: 4091

The fact that making something more expensive pushes certain firms, especially smaller firms with less ability to bear the costs, out of the market should surprise no economist.
LOCATION: 4129

Readers who have not had to deal with financial or business regulations are invited to read the Code of Federal Regulations. At 150,000 pages, it’s wildly interesting reading and not too hard to keep up with: just read one hundred pages each day, and you can get through the existing set of regulations in five years, and hope that they haven’t added too many others by the time you are done. Many of my friends work as compliance officers on Wall Street, and they say that although the regulations all but guarantee them employment, they would not wish the regulations on their worst enemy.
LOCATION: 4150

The best the government can do is crowd out rules that providers of private governance would have provided; or worse, government can impose rules well beyond the optimum and thereby drag down markets. The New York Stock Exchange is still great, but its effectiveness is diminished by countless government regulations.
LOCATION: 4155

When disputes occurred, they had the equivalent of a trial within a tything or between tythings, and the wrongdoer would be asked to compensate the victim. Different tythings would pledge to honor the judgments for their members, and individuals who ignored a judgment were declared outlaws and lost privileges of the system. After the Norman invasion governments realized they could get a piece of the restitution pie by saying that a transgressor violated the king’s peace and must compensate the king as well. Eventually governments mandated that all restitution go to the king, the private system broke down, and the precursor to modern criminal law emerged. In this example, government intervened with private governance not to correct a market failure but to raise revenue for itself.
LOCATION: 4177

In other areas government simply forces people to use governmental “services” even though private alternatives exist. For example, the San Francisco Police Department puts various restrictions on the Patrol Special Police to “encourage” people to hire off-duty government police. Officers working in the 10(b) overtime program get to use their government-provided equipment and earn an additional $87 per hour. Expansion of government in these areas appears to have nothing to do with correcting a market failure, but instead is a means of restricting competition and extracting resources from the public.
LOCATION: 4202

The public interest theory of regulation believes that government intervenes to help the public, whereas the economic theory of regulation discusses how regulations can be imposed to benefit special interests, private or governmental (Stigler, 1971). Some regulations are used to restrict competition and benefit industry insiders and the government officials who share the proceeds (Posner, 1974). Other regulations are simply used to extract resources from successful enterprises (McChesney, 1987). In this stickup form of regulation, the threatened party hands over resources or becomes a servant of the state.
LOCATION: 4237

If a private entity seeks to use laws to protect itself from competition, we should be unsurprised when it does not put the interests of the consumer among its primary objectives. In such industries, cronyism enables government to pick winners and losers, to give privileges to those who advance government’s objectives, and to put out of business those who do not.
LOCATION: 4252

Like price controls that interfere with supply and demand equilibration, government rules and regulations interfere with the searches for beneficial rules and regulations by providers of private governance.
LOCATION: 4262

Where providers of private governance weigh the marginal benefits and marginal costs of additional rules, government officials receive limited market feedback and almost no discipline if they impose harmful rules. Government regulations are one-size-fits-all, mute much of the potential market feedback, and receive pretty much no market discipline.
LOCATION: 4264

These informal markets could almost certainly work more effectively if they did not have to avoid or deal with governments, but the fact that half of all workers worldwide do business outside the control of government is a strong indicator that markets are not a creation of government.
LOCATION: 4280

When writing about economics Hayek refers to the competitive process of the market as a “discovery process” and argues that without markets we have no way of knowing what set of goods should be produced.
LOCATION: 4317

Knowledge problems and accountability problems prevent a centralized government from providing rules and regulations in a manner that holds up to Hayek’s ideals. Just as Hayek ([1976] 1990) abandoned his earlier belief that government needs to provide money and instead called for a system of competing currencies, he could have abandoned his idea that government needs to oversee markets.
LOCATION: 4327

“It has the defects of all monopolies: one must use their product even if it is unsatisfactory, and, above all, it prevents the discovery of better methods of satisfying a need for which a monopolist has no incentive.”
LOCATION: 4331

Indeed, sometimes consumers themselves may not know what they want or that a product is even available, and the value of competition is to propose entrepreneurial innovations that consumers may not realize even existed previously. The desires of consumers are often inchoate until confronted with a tangible choice or opportunity. Competition simultaneously reveals consumer preferences and provides signals to transfer productive resources toward the production of some products rather than others.
LOCATION: 4361

Because no one organization could gather the necessary information to coordinate behavior among millions of individuals, a system of central planning is without a rudder. Markets, on the other hand, help people determine what among the multiple possible uses of a given resource will meet human wants. Through the informal and impersonal workings of the price system, knowledge possessed by one person can be transferred to the rest of society.
LOCATION: 4366

Indeed, Hayek expressly analogizes the process of market discovery of facts to the process of scientific discovery, as many different scientists simultaneously working independently but building on one another’s findings seek an increasingly accurate understanding of the natural world.
LOCATION: 4372

In particular, Hayek came to believe that the bottom-up lawmaking process of the common law was more conducive to liberty, coordination of individual expectations, and efficient use of dispersed knowledge than the top-down legislature-focused approach of those earlier works. In large part this preference arose from Hayek’s understanding of the common law as being analogous to a market process.
LOCATION: 4388

Underlying this approach was Hayek’s (1973, p. 162) conviction, following Hume (1740, Book III, p. 541), that the essence of law is not created by the state, but rather preexists in the conventions and understandings of the individuals that compose a given community. Although this underlying consensus is largely conventional, in that it emerges spontaneously from the decentralized interactions of many people living together in a society, it is far from arbitrary.
LOCATION: 4400

In fact, again following Hume, Hayek notes that every peaceful and functioning society must have at its core a system of rules dealing with the ownership, transference, and protection of property from others—what is conventionally referred to as property, contract, and tort law.
LOCATION: 4404

The basic source of social order … is not a deliberate decision to adopt certain common rules, but the existence among the people of certain opinions of what is right and wrong…. Except where the political unit is created by conquest, people submit to authority not to enable it to do what it likes, but because they trust somebody to act in conformity with certain common conceptions of what is just. There is not first a society which then gives itself rules, but it is common rules which weld dispersed bands into a society.
LOCATION: 4409

The role of the judge, Hayek argued, is not to “make” the law, such as by articulating the “best” rule according to some external standard of value, but to “discover” the law in this imminent consensus of norms and expectations that underlie a given community
LOCATION: 4414

Hayek suggests that the role of a particular judge in the common-law system is analogous to that of the gas station owner in the market system. Although it appears that a judge “makes” the law, Hayek argued that in reality the common-law judge is simply doing what the gas station owner does: articulating or announcing the outcomes of an underlying spontaneous order process, not actually “making” the law. This is the notion in which Hayek argued that judges “discover” the law rather than making it.
LOCATION: 4437

Rather than deciding every case independently, however, the judges in a common-law system use a body of precedents built up over the ages to draw analogies to the particular case at hand. Hayek emphasized, however, that it is not the precedents themselves that are law, but the principles that underlie them. The written precedents are merely verbal formulations, and holdings are examples that provided evidence of the underlying principles that are the true source of law; the case decisions themselves are not the law and do not make the law
LOCATION: 4495

To Hayek the common law is a crucial element of spontaneous order in society. He also praises the common law because it provides a high degree of predictability, one of the major goals of the rule of law. Indeed, although legislation superficially appears more predictable and certain than common law because of the greater verbal precision of legislative pronouncements, Hayek argues that in reality the common law provides greater predictability because its decisions derive from widely shared notions of what is just, making it easier for most people to conform their behavior to the expectations of the law rather than having to seek technical legal advice to know whether a proposed action is permissible.
LOCATION: 4505

At the outset even well-intentioned judges will have little idea if they are discovering the type of laws people support in society, just as a well-intentioned economic planning board will lack the knowledge to discover the appropriate prices of goods and services in the economy without competition and market feedback.
LOCATION: 4561

By applying Hayek’s insights about the knowledge problem in the economy to the workings of the legal system, one is led to a logical, albeit seemingly radical, institutional conclusion: governance, like other goods and services, should be provided in a competitive marketplace. We must have competition among providers of governance, and consumers must be allowed to choose among those suppliers.
LOCATION: 4631

Private providers of rules that respond to the type of law demanded by society will profit, and those that do not will incur losses. The profit-and-loss system will thus signal that a certain kind of law is demanded at any given point in time.
LOCATION: 4654

In fact, of particular interest here is that the legal system that Hayek holds up as the model for his ideal of law was the English common-law system. But that system itself was characterized by multiple providers of legal services competing side-by-side for centuries, including multiple common-law courts, church courts, the law merchant, and other private courts such as the Courts of the Staple
LOCATION: 4665

Parties who were able to vote with their feet could simply refuse to patronize those judges and legal systems that sought to use law to promote their own goals rather than to further the needs of the parties.
LOCATION: 4672

Thus not only is competition in the provision of legal services an implication of Hayek’s theory of law, Hayek’s theory of law itself arose in exactly that institutional context.
LOCATION: 4676

If Hayek is correct that lawmaking is a discovery process similar to the discovery process of economics, it follows that the optimal system for provision of legal services should be predicated on a competition-based, rather than a monopoly-based, system. The need for judges to receive both positive and negative feedback in the provision of dispute resolution services is as relevant in the provision of legal services as it is in anything else.
LOCATION: 4677

Just as competition enables discovery and innovation in markets, competition enables discovery and innovation in governance. If one takes Hayek’s discussion of the importance of discovery through competition seriously, one should question the idea that the state must centrally provide governance. Centralized governance faces knowledge and accountability problems similar to those of central economic planners.
LOCATION: 4682

When solving a problem is a profit opportunity, market participants are extraordinarily good at finding mechanisms for dealing with problems of noncooperation and predation. Anyone who holds up peaceful cooperation as a normative ideal should be extremely impressed with all of these nonviolent mechanisms for eliciting good behavior. Just as entrepreneurs in product markets continually work to satisfy unmet needs of consumers, providers of private governance continually work to solve problems on behalf of consumers.
LOCATION: 4785

Most people are not even aware that a potential problem even existed, whereas others simply misattribute the solution to government. Because private governance is neither hierarchical nor imposed on all, historians and economists often miss it. Research on private governance, however, helps shed light on the private parties that create the order in markets.
LOCATION: 4793

The rules and regulations of the markets came endogenously from the markets. One cannot look at the first stock markets and say, “These markets emerged only after government started enforcing contracts in these markets,” and one cannot look at the history of electronic commerce and say, “Trade emerged only because of technologically competent police and courts.” Government is not the chicken that lays the egg of markets. Instead I would liken it to salmonella, a pathogen associated with but not responsible for chicken and eggs, or to a very large parasite (Hummel, 2001). Like money (Menger, [1871] 2007; White, 1999; Selgin, 2011), the rules of private governance have coevolved with markets rather than being created by the state.
LOCATION: 4806

When one sees thriving cross-border exchange, one should not attribute its existence to government officials who have little appreciation for free-market or international trade. Without private governance, markets probably would be as advanced as the U.S. Postal Service or the Department of Motor Vehicles. The London Stock Exchange and the New York Stock Exchange have done far more to underpin advanced financial markets than any bureaucrat from the Securities and Exchange Commission. American Express, MasterCard, and Visa have done far more to facilitate exchange around the world than any lawmaker, regulator, or cop. Private governance is responsible for much more, but even if it were only responsible for the examples in this book, its accomplishments should still be considered among the greatest achieved by humanity.
LOCATION: 4814

Instead of assuming that markets are underpinned and supported by bureaucrats in blue costumes and black robes, one should recognize the potential shortcomings of government and observe the steps that private parties take to facilitate exchange and protect their property.
LOCATION: 4850

The London Stock Exchange need not threaten incarceration when it has rules limiting who is let in and the threat of excluding rule breakers from the club. American Express need not threaten incarceration when it can encourage merchants and cardholders to follow their rules or else get kicked out of the network and be given a bad credit report. A condominium complex need not threaten incarceration to subcontractors who accidentally damage a building when they have a security deposit from the unit owners or a surety bond from an insurer. From a positive perspective, voluntary associations already enforce most rules without the threat of force.
LOCATION: 4856

The consumer can be completely unaware of all of the intricacies and multiple sources of oversight, whether formal or informal, individualistic, or club based. He can be completely unaware of the private governance that is ultimately provided on his behalf and simply priced into the final product. The fact that so many contracts along the way are unenforceable is irrelevant to the consumer, who just cares about getting the pencil. Simply walk into a store anywhere around the globe, give the clerk a credit card, and you can have anything within your credit limit. Private governance solves problems seamlessly with few people noticing, but it underpins economic exchange.
LOCATION: 4961

The mechanisms of private governance are potentially limitless. They facilitate cooperation in close-knit groups and among relative strangers. They facilitate cooperation between billions of people across political boundaries and anywhere where the government legal system is not capable of or uninterested in facilitating exchange. Private governance is responsible for cooperation in simple informal markets as well as the most advanced markets: stock markets, insurance markets, futures markets, and electronic commerce. Private governance makes markets work. Private governance replaces threats of coercion with numerous noncoercive mechanisms that expand the scope of trade, and it should be seen as one of the most successful peace projects in the history of the world.
LOCATION: 4969
